Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of
information, including suggestions for reducing the burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188),
1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any
penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number.

PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.
1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY)
2. REPORT TYPE

01-03-2012

3. DATES COVERED (From - To)

Final report

January 2010-July 2011
5a. CONTRACT NUMBER

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

A Framework for Considering Climate Change in Transportation and Land
Use Scenario Planning: Lessons Learned from an Interagency Pilot Project on
Cape Cod

Multiple
5b. GRANT NUMBER

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER

5d. PROJECT NUMBER

6. AUTHOR(S)

Ben Rasmussen, Lindsey Morse, David Perlman, Gina Filosa, Carson Poe

HW3LA1, VXJ6, NP74
5e. TASK NUMBER

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

The Volpe National Transportation Systems Center
U.S. Department of Transportation
55 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02142

DOT-VNTSC-FHWA-11-02
DOT-VNTSC-NPS-11-18
DOT-VNTSC-FWS-11-01
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S)

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

Office of Planning, Environment, and Realty, Federal Highway Administration, 1200
New Jersey Ave., SE, Washington, DC 20590 / National Park Service, Washington
Support Office (WASO), 12795 W. Alameda Parkway, Lakewood, CO 80228 / Refuge
Transportation Program, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, 4401 North Fairfax Drive, 6th
floor, Arlington, VA 22203

FHWA, NPS, WASO, FWS
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT
NUMBER(S)

FHWA-HEP-12-028, NPS 609 /108334

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

14. ABSTRACT

The Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project utilized a scenario planning process to develop a
multi-agency transportation- and land use-focused development strategy for Cape Cod, Massachusetts, with the intention of
achieving a reduction in future greenhouse gas emissions and considering the potential impacts of sea-level rise on the region. This
scenario was developed through a process of data collection, scenario development by a consultant and by regional and local
government during a workshop, and scenario assessment. The outcomes of this scenario planning process will inform and support
the region’s long-range transportation planning and other related efforts, as well as the planning efforts of local, state, and federal
agencies. Project members collaborated to document the project’s steps and to offer significant observations and recommendations
that can inform future applications.
15. SUBJECT TERMS

scenario planning, climate change, adaptation, mitigation, interagency
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF:
a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGE

None

None

None

17. LIMITATION OF
ABSTRACT

N/A

18. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON
OF
R.Lupes, FHWA/A.Rutherford, NPS/S.Suder,
PAGES
19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code)

114

FWS

202-366-7808 / 303-969-2578 / 703-358-1752

Reset

Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8/98)

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39.18

A Framework for Considering
Climate Change in
Transportation and Land Use
Scenario Planning
Lessons Learned from an
Interagency Pilot Project on
Cape Cod
March 2012

FHWA-HEP-12-028
NPS 609 /108334

Federal Highway Administration
National Park Service
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

Table of Contents
Overview ........................................................ i
I. Introduction ............................................... 1
The Interagency Transportation,
Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot
Project utilized a scenario planning
process to develop a multi-agency
transportation- and land use-focused
development strategy for Cape Cod,
Massachusetts, with the intention of
achieving a reduction in future
greenhouse gas emissions and
considering the potential impacts of
sea-level rise on the region. The
outcomes of this scenario planning
process will inform and support the
region’s long-range transportation
planning and other related efforts,
as well as the planning efforts of
local, state, and federal agencies.
Project members collaborated to
document the project’s steps and to
offer significant observations and
recommendations that can inform
future applications. This information
is presented in this report. The
appendices and a separate
document, the Technical Scenario
Report, developed by the scenario
planning consultants, provide
supporting documentation.

II. Project Definition ........................................ 7
III. Data Requirements .................................. 16
IV.Scenario Development ............................. 27
V. Assessment of Scenarios ......................... 47
VI.Conclusion .............................................. 54

Appendices
Appendix A: Planning Group and Technical
Committee Charters and Rosters
Appendix B: Literature Review
Appendix C: Request for Proposals
Appendix D: List of Potential Performance
Indicators
Appendix E: Vulnerable Area Map and Key
Appendix F: Potential GHG Reduction
Strategies
Appendix G: Priority Transportation
Strategies for Cape Cod
Appendix H: Scenario Planning Workshop
Agenda

Report Notes and Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by the U.S. Department of Transportation John A. Volpe
National Transportation Systems Center in Cambridge, MA, for the Federal Highway
Administration, National Park Service, and Fish and Wildlife Service. The project team
was led by Benjamin Rasmussen of the Transportation Planning Division and included
Lindsey Morse, also of the Transportation Planning Division, and Gina Filosa, David
Perlman, and Carson Poe of the Program and Organizational Performance Division. The
project team would like to thank the sponsors, Planning Group, Technical Committee,
and local and regional stakeholders – in particular the Cape Cod Commission, Cape Cod
National Seashore, Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority, and towns – for their
participation and contributions.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

Overview
Project
The Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Cape Cod Pilot Project
(Pilot Project) is a federally-sponsored project that took place between early 2010 and
mid 2011. Initiated by a federal interagency working group, the Pilot Project resulted in
a multi-agency transportation and land use development scenario for Cape Cod,
Massachusetts, focused on reducing future greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
considering the potential impacts of sea-level rise (SLR) on the region. This scenario was
developed through a process of data collection, scenario development by a consultant
and by regional and local government during a workshop, and scenario assessment. The
outcomes of this scenario planning process will inform and support the region’s longrange transportation planning and other related efforts, as well as the planning efforts of
local, state, and federal agencies. This project represents one approach to climate
change and scenario planning; other methods exist and can be pursued separately or in
concert with this approach. Project members collaborated to document the project’s
steps and to offer significant observations and recommendations that can inform future
applications. This information is presented in this report.

Report Purpose and Audience
The purpose of this report is to document the process followed by, successes of, and
lessons learned during the Pilot Project in order to provide other communities with
recommendations on how to replicate or build upon this process in the future.
This report provides a framework for federal, state, regional, and local agencies to use
to work collaboratively to reduce GHG emissions and to assess, mitigate, and adapt to
SLR and other potential climate change effects and impacts in transportation and land
use planning using scenario planning. General observations and recommendations are
applicable to other areas throughout the U.S. The report describes potential inputs to
and outputs of the process and provides examples and additional details in appendices
and companion reports. The recommendations are not meant to be prescriptive in
nature. Rather, they represent the views of the Pilot Project team on the successes as
well as opportunities for improving the Pilot Project’s method.
This report is intended to serve as a resource for staff within organizations that may be
interested in, or stand to benefit from, incorporating consideration of climate change
into transportation and land use planning, including metropolitan planning organizations
(MPOs), regional planning organizations (RPOs), state departments of transportation
(DOTs) or other state agencies, counties, and cities. Federal land management,
transportation, natural resource, and emergency management staff, as well as any
federal land-owning agency, may be similarly interested in understanding the value of
the described process and how it can be incorporated into and used in support of local
transportation, land use, and climate change mitigation and adaptation initiatives.
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

i

Structure
The report outlines the steps in the transportation, land use, and climate change
scenario planning process followed by the Pilot Project, which closely match the phases
outlined in the FHWA Scenario Planning Guidebook. However, it is important to note that
this report differs from the FHWA Guidebook in its nature and scope. The FHWA
Guidebook discusses common steps for typical scenario planning exercises, while this
report focuses on the application of those steps to achieve outcomes that address
climate change problems. The Pilot Project process focused on the incorporation of
climate change mitigation and adaptation considerations and goals into a regional-level
scenario planning exercise, whereas the FHWA Scenario Planning Guidebook discusses
more general applications of scenario planning that are applicable across a variety of
topic areas.
For purposes of this report, the scenario planning process was organized into the
following chapters, which are described in brief below.

1.
2.
3.
4.

Project Definition
Data Requirements
Scenario Development
Scenario Assessment

The chapters provide information on the actual process followed, observations made,
and the resulting recommendations for future implementation based on the experience
of the Pilot Project. Observations and recommendations from the project’s approach are
presented at the end of each of the first three chapters. The fourth chapter, Scenario
Assessment, provides observations about how the scenarios performed. Relevant
observations and recommendations for the assessment methodology are captured in
Data Requirements and Scenario Development.
The conclusion of the report reviews the goals of the project, outlines recommended
steps and considerations for future applications of the process, and reviews the role that
various participants – federal, state, regional, and local – can play in the process.
Project Definition
Project definition consists of selection of the study area, identification of roles and
responsibilities, coordination with existing plans and research, and determination of
outputs and outcomes. Stakeholder coordination and communication were very
important due to the involvement of many federal, state, regional, and local agencies. A
review of the existing literature and efforts around related topics created a foundation of
work on which the Pilot Project could build, not replicate, and use as appropriate.
Finally, the involved entities worked together throughout the Pilot Project to define
desired and expected outcomes and outputs, and to determine how best to incorporate
them into federal, state, regional, and local agencies’ project proposals and short- and
long-range plans.
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

ii

Data Requirements
Scenario planning is a data-intensive process and, accordingly, the Pilot Project
depended on robust data for each of its major elements: creating the baseline of
existing conditions, developing the performance indicators for evaluation, and projecting
future conditions. Data on transportation infrastructure and services, land use,
population, resource protection and preservation, and SLR were integral to the
development of the land use and transportation scenarios and evaluation of the
scenarios based on identified performance indicators.

Scenario Development
The Pilot Project developed a total of 10 transportation and land use scenarios with the
assistance of a scenario planning consultant and software tool that were selected
through a request for proposals. Five of these scenarios, including the final Refined
scenario, were developed by stakeholders during a series of workshops and meetings.
These scenarios consisted of the following:
1-5.

Five preliminary scenarios developed by the scenario planning consultant for
demonstrative purposes, consisting of:
1. Trend
2. Dispersed – Standard Transportation
3. Dispersed – Enhanced Transportation
4. Targeted – Standard Transportation
5. Targeted – Enhanced Transportation

6-9.

Four scenarios developed by stakeholder participants at a November 2010
workshop

10.

One refined scenario developed by stakeholders after the workshop

All the scenarios involved the placement of population and employment based on
growth assumptions for 2030 and the identification of transit improvements.

Scenario Assessment
The 10 scenarios were assessed using a set of performance indicators that covered GHG
mitigation, adaptation to SLR, transit access, and protection of natural ecosystems and
other areas of significance. Performance indicators, or measures of performance, allow
participants to compare the effects or consequences of different land use and
transportation decisions.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

iii

Introduction
Background
In 2008, the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) assembled 13 federal agencies 1 to
form the Interagency Working Group on Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change.
The Working Group’s goal was to identify opportunities to align federal programs and
resources to support regional communities in achieving GHG emission reductions and
preparing for potential climate change impacts through transportation and land use
planning decisions. The Working Group identified two focus areas where federal
agencies could begin to align efforts to address climate change:


Integrated Regional Planning and Development: This focus area recognizes the



Intermodal Gateway Mobility Planning: This focus area seeks to provide multi-

continuing need to link short and long-range transportation planning and
corridor-level planning studies performed by state and local governments to the
planning processes of local land use (primarily housing and economic
development) and environmental agencies.

modal transportation options to move both people and goods to, from, and
through gateway communities, defined as areas traveled through to get to a
destination such as a national park, national forest, national wildlife refuge,
airport, beach, or port. Federal involvement supporting more comprehensive
planning for gateway community mobility, in both metropolitan and rural areas,
can lead to better decisions that benefit communities and can lead to reduced
growth of vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and consequently GHG emission
reductions.

Formation of Pilot Project
In 2009, the Working Group selected Cape Cod, Massachusetts as a pilot area to
facilitate and enhance integrated regional and intermodal gateway mobility planning at
the state, regional, and local levels. The U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT)
Volpe National Transportation Systems Center (Volpe Center) began the resulting
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project (Pilot Project) in
early 2010 along with FHWA, the National Park Service (NPS), and the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (FWS). These agencies viewed the Pilot Project as an opportunity to
address GHG reduction and transportation-based adaptation to climate change and to
pilot and evaluate scenario planning as a method for doing so.

1

Department of Energy, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Environmental Protection Agency, Federal
Aviation Administration, Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, Federal Transit Administration, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, Office of the Secretary of Transportation, Army Corps of Engineers, Department of
Agriculture (USDA), USDA Forest Service, Department of the Interior, and Bureau of Land Management .

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

1

Goals
The Pilot Project intended to address the following goals:


Climate Change. Incorporate climate change considerations – namely, reduction

of GHG emissions and the impacts of climate change effects on the
transportation system – into transportation and land use planning.



Scenario Planning. Use scenario planning as a method/tool for considering
climate change in transportation and land use planning, and developing a future
transportation and land use strategy.



Interagency Coordination. Share and coordinate resources and expertise



Replicability. Establish an overall process that can be replicated elsewhere.

between multiple federal, regional, and local stakeholders, and better integrate
agencies’ planning processes.

Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation
The nation’s transportation system contributes significantly to overall U.S. GHG
emissions and, as a result, to climate change, which is causing effects, such as SLR, that
will negatively impact the transportation system. Therefore, attempts within the
transportation field to address climate change entail two components: mitigation and
adaptation. Mitigation encompasses activities aimed at reducing GHG emissions from
transportation infrastructure and activities, and adaptation refers to activities aimed at
increasing the resiliency of the transportation network (or specific infrastructure assets)
when confronted with expected, or actual, climate change impacts. Federal, state,
regional, and local government agencies and partners who are involved in
transportation, land use, emergency management, and related areas share the
responsibility for mitigation and adaptation within the transportation context.

GHG Emissions Mitigation
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) defines a GHG as any gas that traps heat in
the atmosphere. Certain GHGs, like carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and methane, occur
naturally in the atmosphere but are also produced through the combustion of fossil fuels
and other industrial processes. These additional sources of GHG emissions trap extra
heat in the atmosphere, causing shifts in the planet’s climate. Transportation represents
a significant source of GHG emissions, both in the U.S. and worldwide. The EPA
estimates that U.S. tailpipe emissions 2 represent 27 percent of the country’s total GHG

2

Tailpipe emissions are those produced directly by burning fuel to power vehicles and do not include emissions
associated with constructing or maintaining transportation infrastructure, extracting or refining fuels, or producing
vehicles.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

2

emissions and five percent of global GHG emissions. 3 Reducing transportation’s
contribution to overall GHG emissions and the resulting changes in climate will require
mitigation strategies that reduce fossil fuel consumption and the carbon content of fuels.
These include, but are not limited to, improving system and operational efficiencies,
reducing growth of VMT, transitioning to lower GHG fuels, and improving vehicle
technologies. A more thorough discussion of GHG emission reduction strategies for Cape
Cod is presented in Section III, and a list of strategies is in Appendix F: Potential GHG
Reduction Strategies.

Climate Change Adaptation
While lowering transportation GHG emissions is an important strategy for reducing the
long-term effects of climate change, mitigation will likely do little in the short-term to
alter climate change processes already underway. Adaptation to the anticipated effects
of climate change is a climate change strategy equally important as mitigation.
Adaptation consists of five primary actions: repair and maintenance,
reconstruction/strengthening, relocation, abandonment, and redundancy.
Climate change stands to have effects on transportation infrastructure in a variety of
ways. 4 The expected effects differ by region of the U.S. based on geographical,
meteorological, and other features, but common effects include rising sea levels,
increasingly frequent and intense storms, higher average temperatures, greater levels of
precipitation, and drought. 5,6 An increasingly volatile and severe climate will necessitate
transportation infrastructure that is more resilient, but the uncertainty of climate change
will also demand planning practices that anticipate the range of potential changes that
may occur over the lifespan of new and existing infrastructure. In certain cases,
fortifying infrastructure to withstand wider temperature extremes and more severe
storm activity will suffice but adaptation to climate change, particularly in low-lying
coastal areas, may require difficult decisions about relocating or abandoning at-risk
facilities.

U.S. EPA (2011). Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990 to 2009.
(http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/32000/32700/32779/DOT_Climate_Change_Report_-_April_2010__Volume_1_and_2.pdf).
3

4
ICF International (2010). Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies. Prepared for
the Federal Highway Administration. (http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/hep/climate/climate_effects/effects03.cfm)

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2007). IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007 – Synthesis
Report. (http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/syr/en/mains1.html#1-1)
5

U.S. Global Change Research Program (2009). Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States: A State of
Knowledge Report from the U.S. Global Change Research Program.

6

(http://downloads.globalchange.gov/usimpacts/pdfs/climate-impacts-report.pdf)

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

3

Scenario Planning
Scenario planning is a technique that allows organizations to prepare for potential future
conditions. Instead of planning for a single predicted future and risking significant loss
should reality diverge from prediction, military strategists, and later corporate strategic
planners, began developing ranges of possibilities for the future that allowed them to
identify common strategies to pursue in preparation for all of the possibilities. This riskmitigation scenario planning has been used to address climate change adaptation, as it
accommodates preparing for multiple possible levels of impact, but it has not yet been
applied widely by the transportation community for climate change adaptation or
mitigation. The diagram in Figure 1 illustrates this approach.
NPS has applied this type of scenario planning to climate change adaptation, with some
implications for transportation infrastructure and access. The NPS approach allows park
managers to develop possible future climate change scenarios, in terms of SLR,
precipitation, and other effects, that could affect parks, and evaluate responses to each
that protect natural, cultural, and physical resources, including buildings, roads, bridges,
and other facilities. Given the uncertainty of climate change, this approach allows park
managers to assess which responses are most likely to be beneficial across all scenarios
or at least those scenarios determined to be most likely. 7

Figure 1: Risk-mitigation scenario planning allows organizations to develop strategies that will
prepare them for a range of possible futures.

7

National Park Service Climate Change Response Program. “Adaptation and Scenario Planning.”
(http://www.nps.gov/climatechange/adaptationplanning.cfm)

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

4

According to FHWA, scenario planning is being used by MPOs nation-wide is “an
analytical tool that can help transportation professionals prepare for what lies ahead.
Scenario planning provides a framework for developing a shared vision for the future by
analyzing various forces that affect growth.” 8 The use of scenario planning by MPOs for
evaluating transportation and land use issues and decisions follows an approach similar
to that of alternatives analysis, wherein several alternatives are developed and
evaluated, and one outcome is selected. However, in using scenario planning, MPOs are
able to consider the interactions between many factors, and use extensive public
engagement to develop and assess the future scenarios. Thus, instead of establishing a
range of possible future conditions and shaping decisions to address as many of those
conditions as possible, this land use and transportation-focused application of scenario
planning allows stakeholders to evaluate the consequences of several courses of action
and select the outcome and course of action that best meets the goals of the
community. 9 The diagram in Figure 1 illustrates this approach.

Figure 2: The use of scenario planning by MPOs enables organizations to select a shared vision
for the future from a range of possibilities and to develop corresponding strategies designed to
work towards that future. Source: N PS Clim ate Change Response Program .

8

Federal Highway Administration. What is Scenario Planning? (http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/scenplan/)

9
Bartholomew, Keith. Land use-transportation scenario planning: promise and reality. Transportation 34 (2006).
(http://faculty.arch.utah.edu/bartholomew/fulltext.pdf)

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

5

The FHWA Scenario Planning Guidebook documents the application of scenario planning
to transportation and land use planning. However, FHWA acknowledges that “next
generation” scenario planning for transportation can also take into account a range of
factors that have not traditionally been considered in the transportation system,
including climate change. 10

Application of Scenario Planning to the Pilot Project
As a next generation scenario planning effort, the Pilot Project was issue-focused on
climate change and multiple agency involvement. Rather than developing broad
transportation and land use goals or determining strategies for goals that had already
been established through a planning process, the Pilot Project took as a starting point
the goals of reducing GHG emissions and preparing for climate change impacts through
agencies’ and other stakeholders’ transportation and land use decisions. In addition, the
Pilot Project determined specific growth projections in population and employment for
2030 that were used as targets during the scenario planning process. The Pilot Project
intended to use scenario planning as an educational tool to engage and inform a broad
group of stakeholders around climate change issues through an integrated planning
approach.
This project did not result in the development of a regional transportation plan (RTP),
nor did it lead to decisions about development patterns at the neighborhood or parcel
level, or prescribe zoning or development types. Instead, participants worked at a
regional scale to indicate the desired locations for preservation, development, and
improvements to transportation services based on GHG emissions and climate-change
impact considerations. The impact of these regional determinations was then evaluated
by important indicators, or measures of performance, which were selected based on the
goals of the exercise, the data available, and the scenario planning tool being employed.
This process allowed for the testing of the relationships among transportation,
development, GHG emissions, and climate change impacts, and raised awareness about
the implications of transportation and land use decisions on climate change issues. The
outcomes of the scenario planning process are anticipated to help inform future versions
of the RTP as well as other state, local, and federal agency transportation and
development plans for the region.

For more information on the FHWA scenario planning program, see the FHWA Scenario Planning Guidebook and
website. (www.fhwa.dot.gov/Planning/scenplan/ )

10

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

6

Project Definition
Identification of Study Area
The Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Working Group selected
Cape Cod, Massachusetts as the location for the Pilot Project based on a number of
factors, described below, that fit with the Working Group’s goal and focus areas. As
shown in Figure 3 , Cape Cod is located in Barnstable County in southeastern
Massachusetts and encompasses 15 towns as well as several other landowners,
including the NPS Cape Cod National Seashore, the FWS Monomoy National Wildlife
Refuge, and the Massachusetts Military Reservation.

Figure 3: Location of Cape Cod within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and map of the
roadway network and government entities within Cape Cod. Source: M assGI S, PlaceM atters,

and Placew ays.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

7

The Working Group selected Cape Cod for the Pilot Project due to the following factors:


Gateway communities. The 15 towns serve as gateways to a variety of
recreational travel destinations and transportation hubs. The Cape Cod National
Seashore experiences over four million visits annually 11 while ferries servicing
Nantucket and Martha’s Vineyard from points on Cape Cod carry two and half to
three million passengers each year. 12 Other recreational destinations on Cape
Cod include the Monomoy National Wildlife Refuge and numerous beaches,
resorts, campgrounds, and bike trails.



Presence of and special area of concern for several federal agencies. Many
federal agencies are responsible for land and facilities on Cape Cod, including
NPS, FWS, the U.S. Geological Survey, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the
U.S. Coast Guard, and the U.S. Air Force.



Existing partnerships. Cape Cod has a strong county government and has a



history of regional initiatives and partnerships. For example, Cape Cod’s regional
planning agency, the Cape Cod Commission, has a long-standing relationship
with the Cape Cod National Seashore as well as the Cape Cod Regional Transit
Authority and has collaborated with them on transportation planning efforts and
projects. All three of these agencies are represented in the membership of the
Cape Cod MPO.

Geographically-bounded transportation, land use, and economic development
issues. Cape Cod is separated from mainland Massachusetts by a canal

constructed in 1914. 13 Two bridges, the Sagamore and the Bourne, connect
vehicle traffic to Cape Cod, while rail, ferry, and air service also transport people
and freight. Cape Cod and its transportation, land use, and economic
development issues are, therefore, relatively self-contained. Common issues
include drastic seasonal variation in population, congestion, and strain on water
resources.


Coastal location and vulnerability to certain projected climate change effects,
such as SLR. As a low-lying coastal peninsula with significant shoreline

development and strictly limited access to the mainland, the threats of SLR and
storms that are more frequent and severe carry significant potential to impact
the human and natural environments of Cape Cod.

11

National Park Service Public Use Statistics Office. NPS Stats. (http://www.nature.nps.gov/stats/park.cfm)

Cape Cod Commission (2011). Cape Cod 2011 Regional Transportation Plan (March 2011 Draft). Prepared for the Cape
Cod Metropolitan Planning Organization. (http://www.gocapecod.org/rtp/RTP2011docs/Ch2-5WaterMARCH_2011.pdf)
12

13
The Cape Cod Canal bisects the Towns of Bourne and Sandwich. Even though, as a result, parts of Bourne and
Sandwich are located on the mainland, both are considered to be part of Cape Cod.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

8



Interest in sustainability. Cape Cod faces severe congestion issues due to its

limited access, high percentage of population that commutes off-Cape for work,
and high seasonal visitation. In response, Cape Cod partners have invested in
efforts to create alternatives to personal vehicle access and traditional fuel
dependency for both tourists and residents. In addition, Cape Cod National
Seashore staff, working with partners, have demonstrated an interest in planning
for long-term impacts of SLR on parking and other beach facilities.

Identification of Partners, Roles, Responsibilities, and Resources
The primary participants in the Pilot Project consisted of the project team, Planning
Group, Technical Committee, and scenario planning consultant.

Project Team
The Volpe Center served as the coordinator, facilitator, and manager of the tasks and
partnerships that comprised the Pilot Project. The Volpe Center is a fee-for-service
research agency under the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Research and
Innovative Technology Administration. This role could be undertaken by other federal
agencies or state or regional entities.

Sponsor Agencies
FHWA, NPS, and FWS contributed funding and staffing support to the Pilot Project in
order to advance each agency’s climate change adaptation and mitigation interests and
activities and integrate their planning processes with those of other stakeholders.
Outcomes of interest included the development of a shared transportation and land use
scenario that would affect agency assets in the region, and the establishment of a
successful and replicable process that could be distributed within these agencies and to
their partners. Representatives from the sponsor agencies participated in the Pilot
Project as members of the Planning Group but also guided its intended outputs and
outcomes by recommending and requesting specific deliverables.

Regional Agencies
The Pilot Project’s primary regional stakeholder agencies were the Cape Cod Regional
Transit Authority, Cape Cod National Seashore, and the Cape Cod Commission, the
region’s land use planning and regulatory agency, which coordinates transportation
planning activities under the guidance of the MPO. These agencies were responsible for
providing certain necessary data, identifying and coordinating outreach to town
representatives, and refining the selected scenario. These agencies will also lead efforts
to integrate and implement elements of the refined scenario on Cape Cod.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

9

Planning Group
The purpose of the Planning Group was to guide the development of the Pilot Project.
The Planning Group comprised representatives from the sponsor agencies, regional
agencies, and other federal agencies, including several from the Interagency Working
Group as well as the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and Department
of Defense.
The primary functions of the Planning Group, which were outlined in a charter, were:








Provide general guidance and oversight of the pilot project.
Incorporate Technical Committee input into decision-making.
Guide development of interim products and results.
Guide the development of and review interim products and deliverables.
Provide input into the crafting of development scenarios for Cape Cod.
Communicate and integrate results and findings into stakeholder plans.
Provide feedback on pilot project process and areas for improvement.

The Planning Committee convened for monthly conference calls. The roster and charter
for the Planning Group is included in Appendix A: Planning Group and Technical
Committee Charters and Rosters.

Technical Committee
Based on Planning Group recommendations, individuals representing expertise in
transportation, resource management, and coastal geology were asked to join a
Technical Committee, which provided input and direction to the technical aspects of the
project, including climate science and GHG reduction strategies. Although certain
members of the Planning Group were also invited to join the Technical Committee, most
Technical Committee members represented staff from state transportation,
environment, and coastal management agencies, federal resource agencies, and
scientific research institutions.
The primary functions of the Technical Committee, which were outlined in a charter,
were:








Provide guidance to the Planning Group regarding all technical issues.
Identify resources appropriate for literature review.
Assist in data collection and provide information on ways to integrate GHG
emission mitigation measures and climate change effects and impacts into
scenarios.
Provide input into the desired targets for scenarios with regard to climate
change.
Provide input into the crafting of development scenarios.
Communicate and integrate results and findings into stakeholder plans.
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

10

Technical Committee members were convened on an as-needed basis. The roster and
charter for the Technical Committee is included in Appendix A: Planning Group and
Technical Committee Charters and Rosters.
During the Pilot Project, the Technical Committee was charged with two specific tasks:
1. The development of localized estimates for SLR and storm surge impacts.
2. The identification of transportation mitigation measures that could be applied to
Cape Cod and quantification/estimation of the potential reduction in GHG
emissions from the application of these measures to Cape Cod.
Section III presents a more in-depth discussion of these tasks.

Scenario Planning Consultant
To obtain the necessary expertise and software tools for use in the scenario planning
process, the Planning Group developed a Request for Proposals (RFP), which the Volpe
Center used to procure a scenario planning consultant. The final RFP is available in
Appendix C: Request for Proposals. The RFP defined several roles for the consultant,
including:






Introducing the Planning Group and Technical Committee to the scenario
planning tool.
Developing a list of performance indicators for the scenario planning exercise.
Developing baseline and preliminary scenarios.
Preparing and facilitating a scenario planning stakeholder workshop.
Finalizing and documenting the selected scenario.

After reviewing a number of proposals, the Volpe Center selected a consultant team
composed of representatives from PlaceMatters, Inc., Placeways, LLC, the University of
Colorado Denver Center for Sustainable Infrastructure Systems, and the Transportation
Research Center. Through its selection of this consultant team, the Pilot Project elected
to use the software tool CommunityViz for scenario development. The tool had technical
and interactive functionality that met the objectives of the Pilot Project. CommunityViz is
a decision-support extension for ArcGIS, a group of geographic information system
(GIS) software products that builds upon the information organization and presentation
capabilities of GIS. CommunityViz enables users of a GIS to establish alternative futures,
analyze their effects, and communicate results to stakeholders. The consultant team
used CommunityViz in developing the preliminary scenarios, conducting the workshop,
developing the refined scenario, and conducting an evaluation of the scenarios using
performance indicators that linked transportation, land use, and population density data
with VMT and associated GHG emissions.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

11

Coordination with Existing Studies, Plans, and Processes
Various federal, state, regional, and local agencies and organizations have conducted
studies related specifically to planning and climate change on Cape Cod specifically over
the past decade. During the preliminary phases of the Pilot Project, the project team
reviewed existing plans and studies that were identified through a scan of literature and
based on recommendations from the Planning Group and Technical Committee. The
project team reviewed relevant studies pertaining to climate change impacts nationally,
regionally, and on Cape Cod. Local available plans included a Regional Policy Plan,
Regional Transportation Plan, and Hazard Mitigation Plan. The literature review directly
informed the expert elicitation on sea-level rise and climate change impacts and the
development of GHG reduction strategies. The results of the team’s literature review are
available in Appendix B: Literature Review.

Identification of Outcomes
As a pilot project, the anticipated outcomes and outputs evolved over the course of the
project as new challenges and opportunities were identified. This report and its
accompanying materials, including the Technical Scenario Report, contain descriptions of
the process and the main outputs, including a literature review, results of an expert
elicitation, GHG emission reduction strategies, and the scenario planning model and
database.
The project team worked with the FHWA, NPS, and FWS to help them consider how
they could best integrate the approach of the Pilot Project into planning efforts
nationally and in other regions. At the local and regional level, the project team worked
with the Cape Cod National Seashore and Cape Cod Commission to incorporate the Pilot
Project’s specific outcomes into action plans to inform future planning efforts and project
proposals.
An action plan identifies steps that can be taken to incorporate project outcomes or
recommendations into existing and future plans and activities of an agency to ensure
that those outcomes or recommendations are implemented. For example, the project
team worked with the Cape Cod Commission to document the data, assumptions, and
processes used to develop the Refined scenario and to detail opportunities to implement
and build upon it at the regional and local levels. The action plan will ensure that the
Refined scenario remains a viable long-term vision for the region by incorporating it into
future land use, transportation, sustainability, and climate change plans. The Volpe
Center also provided input for the Cape Cod National Seashore’s Climate Friendly Parks
Action Plan, which was developed concurrently with the Pilot Project and drew upon the
GHG emission reduction strategies identified for the Pilot Project.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

12

Observations and Recommendations
Initiating the Project

Observation 1: The Working Group selected Cape Cod to be the focus region for the

Pilot Project. Therefore, the process was proposed to the region’s regional planning
agency, transit agency, and towns; those groups did not initiate the process. Although
the federal role was vital in piloting the process followed on Cape Cod, federal
involvement influenced the direction of the Pilot Project such that it was not solely based
on regional needs and goals. For instance, local and regional stakeholders identified
freshwater supply and wastewater treatment as more urgent constraints to growth than
climate change adaptation and mitigation, though the latter were priorities of the
project’s federal sponsor agencies.


R ecom m endation: Ensure that the process originates with a local or regional

agency with jurisdiction and interest in land use and transportation, such as an
MPO, RPO, city, or federal land management agency, such as a national park.
Within those agencies, a variety of staff should be involved – transportation
planners and engineers, land use planners, environmental and natural resource
specialists, and GIS analysts – so as to provide a comprehensive perspective on
the relevant issues. The origination of the project at the local or regional level
should not preclude other federal agencies from participating, but organizations
at the regional or local levels can directly assess how best to pursue a climate
change-focused scenario planning effort, by engaging in a number of preparatory
activities, including:




Organizing and establishing buy-in from local stakeholders.
Evaluating data availability and quality (discussed in Section III).
Determining the appropriate scope and outputs based on the status of
existing planning efforts.

Observation 2: Cape Cod is subject to legislation that facilitates effective regional
planning. In planning, there are states with legislation that requires comprehensive
plans that are consistent horizontally and vertically and there are those without such
legislation. Horizontal consistency requires that components within a single
comprehensive plan be consistent (e.g., the land use plan provides zoning to
accommodate housing types needed to meet the affordable housing plan’s goals).
Vertical consistency requires that regional and local plans, state plans, zoning
regulations, and permitting be consistent. Massachusetts does not have state legislation
that requires vertical consistency but there are regional exceptions, such as the towns
within Barnstable County, which are required to have plans consistent with the Cape
Cod Commission’s regional comprehensive plan. 14 The Pilot Project benefited from

14

Cape Cod Commission Act, Section 9. (http://www.capecodcommission.org/CCCact.htm)

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

13

working in a region that required local plans to be consistent with regional plans and
transportation plans to be consistent with land use plans.


R ecom m endation: Understand the legislation governing planning for a region
and its implications for enforcement of any regional planning decisions. Being in
a “non-plan” state does not mean that this approach will be unsuccessful but it
may require additional coordination and agreements among entities within the
region to enforce regional decisions.

Establishing Project Goals

Observation 3: Since a transportation-focused work group initiated the Pilot Project

and had pre-defined goals, other locally-important issues were not intended to be a
primary focus. However, over the course of the project, stakeholders identified
additional topics, such as water resources, as priority focus areas. Although water
resources were considered indirectly as performance indicators in the scenario
development process, they could have been used to constrain development and to
better inform the process.


R ecom m endation: Consider how stakeholders will be involved in defining the
project goals, identify issues beyond transportation and land use at the initiation
of the project, and determine if or how such issues can be addressed within the
scope of the scenario planning process. While it may be difficult to treat certain
issues as secondary to the core goals of an effort, especially those with
significant impacts on the placement of development, a determination at the
beginning of the process as to how to treat these related issues will help the
project maintain its focus later on. If included in the effort, such factors can be
assigned a performance indicator – as in the case of the Pilot Project – and be
used as an additional evaluation criterion.

Defining Roles and Responsibilities

Observation 4: One of the most important aspects of the Pilot Project was the
interagency nature of the project. Partners at all levels of government, including federal,
state, regional, and local agencies, were intrinsically involved throughout the course of
the project. The partners played a key role in developing the final output, and will
ultimately be responsible for implementing actions identified. Keeping the various
partners engaged was important, as each contributed essential data, tools, and
resources.


R ecom m endation: Develop a diverse stakeholder group that can enhance the
scenario planning activities. Implementation of a scenario, particularly one based
on transportation, land use, and climate change, will ultimately fall to a variety of
stakeholders so their participation in guiding the overall effort and scenario
development can help ensure their commitment to the final scenario. In the case
of the Pilot Project, the presence of several large federal and state land holdings
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

14

on Cape Cod necessitated the involvement of their respective management
agencies. Just as a climate change-focused scenario planning effort should
originate with an MPO, RPO, city, county, or federal land unit, an agency at that
level is also in an ideal position to serve as the central coordinating partner. It
may be appropriate for a third party to maintain responsibility for managing the
day-to-day aspects of the project, but the planning agency for the focus region
will be in the best position to effectively conduct outreach and coordination and
ensure that the myriad of partners stay engaged throughout the process.

Coordination with Existing Planning Processes

Observation 5: Regional, local, and agency-specific policy, transportation, and hazard

mitigation plans are updated on a regular cycle, typically every five years. Plans for Cape
Cod that had been recently updated were able to inform the Pilot Project, but the Pilot
Project’s results will not directly be incorporated into these plans until their next update.


R ecom m endation: Consider the update cycle of relevant plans in determining

how best to integrate the scenario planning effort.

Defining Desired Outputs of the Scenario Planning Process

Observation 6: Scenario planning can lead to a range of outputs, including the

development of goals, the design of one preferred scenario, the provision of insights
that inform the planning process, or the development of strategies, policies, and action
items in pursuit of existing goals. In the case of the Pilot Project, building awareness
around pressing climate change and transportation issues and identifying potential
actions for investigating these issues in greater detail were just as important outputs as
the final scenario. In fact, the final scenario will serve as a tool and resource for
subsequent studies by stakeholder agencies on Cape Cod.


R ecom m endation: Assess what the desired outputs are at the beginning of the
scenario planning initiative. If conducting scenario planning specifically for
climate change mitigation and adaptation, the output may not be a
comprehensive plan, but rather a set of inputs, strategies, and goals to
incorporate into a long range transportation plan (LRTP), comprehensive plan, or
regional policy plan (RPP). Scenario planning may also provide an opportunity to
test and understand the implications of new ideas to incorporate into an LRTP or
RPP update.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

15

Data Requirements
Scenario planning is a data-intensive process and, accordingly, the Pilot Project
depended on robust data for each of its major elements: creating the baseline of
existing conditions, developing the performance indicators for evaluation and projecting
future conditions. Data were collected from state and other GIS databases, federal
resources, the Cape Cod Commission, and towns. As the project progressed, some
critical data sets that didn’t currently exist had to be created from scratch.
This section provides a summary of the data needed to develop performance indicators ̶
specifically, measures of mitigation and adaptation ̶ as well as baseline land use and
transportation data required for the development of the scenarios. Additional details on
data collection, limitations, and development can be found in the various appendices
referenced and the Technical Scenario Report.

Selection of Performance Indicators
Performance indicators, or measures of performance, allow participants to compare the
effects or consequences of different land use and transportation decisions. Selection of
the performance indicators was an important early consideration for the Pilot Project.
The Pilot Project began with identifying performance indicators that matched the goals
of the project and incorporating these into the RFP for the scenario planning consultant.
These five key performance indicators were:






Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
Transport energy use.
Congestion and vehicle miles traveled.
Cost to implement the scenario.
Preservation of natural/existing ecosystems.

Other indicators of interest expressed early in the process included impacts on habitat;
energy, air pollution, water, and waste reduction targets; and sustainability, livability,
physical activity, and economic development measures. Due to the Pilot Project’s focus
on climate change adaptation, percentage of development vulnerable to climate change
effects also became an important indicator once the expert elicitation process, described
below, resulted in a data layer that could support this measure.
Although cost to implement the scenario was proposed as a potential indicator, it was
ultimately not included in the analysis due to the lack of sufficient data and the inability
to model specific GHG emission strategies. Additionally, because the Pilot Project
focused on the process by which development and transportation investment decisions
are made at the regional level, the scale was not conducive to developing cost estimates
for specific capital or operational projects.
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

16

As part of its response to the Volpe Center’s RFP, the consultant team provided the
Planning Group with a list of over 60 possible indicators (see Appendix D: List of
Potential Performance Indicators) for use in the project’s scenario planning model,
including indicators that matched the RFP request. Based on data availability and input
on importance, or priority ranking, from the Planning and Technical Committees, the
initial list was edited down to the following eleven performance measures:


Vehicle miles traveled (VMT):
 Regional percentage change in peak VMT.



GHG emissions:
 Percentage change in GHG emissions.



Impact of sea-level rise (SLR):
 Percentage of new population in vulnerable areas, which include all areas
within the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) Flood
Insurance Rate Map risk areas as well as areas identified by the expert
elicitation.



Preservation of natural/existing ecosystems:
 Percentage of new population in critical habitat areas.
15
 Percentage land area developed (from previously undeveloped or rural) .
 Percentage of new population in undeveloped or rural lands.
16
 Percentage of new population in other high priority conservation areas .



Impact on other areas:
 Percentage of new population in historic preservation areas.
 Percentage of new population in water resource and wellhead protection
areas and percentage of new population in such areas with less than
three dwelling units per acre.



Accessibility indicators:
 Percentage of new population served by transit.
 Percentage of new employees served by transit.

Details on the methodology for the GHG mitigation and SLR indicators are included
below as they are the focus of the Pilot Project. The methodology for how the additional
indicators were developed, measured, and impacted by the scenario development
15

Developed land is defined as density exceeding one dwelling unit per 10 acres; undeveloped is defined as density equal
or less than one dwelling unit per 10 acres.

16

Areas include those designated for open space or conservation by the state, town, or Cape Cod Commission.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

17

process is included in the Technical Scenario Report. Section V discusses the
performance of the resulting scenarios based on these indicators.

Sea-Level Rise and Other Climate Change Impacts
The project team determined that no regional SLR impact estimates existed for Cape
Cod. Several computer-based models exist to conduct regional-level estimates but lack
the specificity at the local level that was desired and require investment of significant
time and resources. Thus, the Pilot Project team decided to organize and facilitate a
consensus-/group-based expert elicitation (EE) with local and regional coastal experts at
Woods Hole, Massachusetts in July 2010. The coastal experts included staff from the
following agencies:








National Park Service
Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT)
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Provincetown Center for Coastal Studies
Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve
US Geological Service (USGS)
US Army Corps of Engineers

The project team coordinated with the USGS to identify several GIS layers in advance
for reference during the EE, including orthophotography, landform and geologic maps,
elevation data, and FEMA flood areas. The EE also referenced the literature review that
had been conducted (see Appendix B: Literature Review), in particular the USGS coastal
vulnerability assessment of Cape Cod.
The initial goal for the EE was to develop SLR impact projections for specific areas of
Cape Cod for three time horizons (20, 50, and 100 years), and, if feasible, for three
scenarios (low, medium, and high SLR estimates). However, during the EE, the experts
acknowledged that this level of detail, and focusing on inundation only, was not
possible. The limiting factors included the dynamic conditions influencing SLR at local
levels, a lack of robust data sources, and the feasibility of the requisite analysis and
modeling within the scope and scale of the Pilot Project.
Due to these limitations, the EE workshop focused on identifying vulnerable areas, or
areas of concern, for SLR and other climate-related impacts on Cape Cod. Experts
identified specific areas that they considered vulnerable based on the following criteria:





Elevation
Exposure to storm surge
Erosion
SLR impacts

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

18

The EE workshop resulted in an indexed map of the vulnerable areas with a key to
specific explanations of why certain areas were marked as potentially vulnerable. The
map and key are provided in Appendix E: Vulnerable Area Map and Key.

Transportation Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Strategies
The Technical Committee developed a preliminary list of mitigation strategies based on a
literature review, in particular the report Moving Cooler: An Analysis of Transportation
Strategies for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 17 That study, commissioned by a
group of federal agencies and a diverse set of interest groups, assesses the potential
effectiveness of transportation strategies to reduce GHG emissions through reduced
travel activity or improved vehicle and system operations.
Drawing upon Moving Cooler, the Technical Committee created an initial list of strategies
and then tailored specific strategies to address the regional context. Through a series of
conference calls, the group revised the initial list of strategies, adding ones that might
be pursued and deleting those that were deemed infeasible for Cape Cod. For example,
while increasing the gas tax may be an effective mitigation strategy, regional and local
agencies in Massachusetts do not have the authority to amend the gas tax rate. The
group focused only on strategies that could be implemented at the local level; policies
that require federal or state action were not included.
The final list of potential GHG emission reduction strategies, which can be found in
Appendix F: Potential GHG Reduction Strategies, is organized into seven categories:
1. Pricing strategies. These strategies raise the costs associated with the use of
some components of the transportation system relative to others.
2. Land use and smart growth strategies. These strategies create more
transportation-efficient land use patterns (i.e., fewer and shorter vehicle trips).
3. Non-motorized transportation strategies. These strategies encourage greater
levels of walking and bicycling as alternatives to driving.
4. Public transportation strategies. These strategies encourage greater use of, and
aim to expand the availability of, public transportation.
5. Regional ride-sharing, car-sharing, and commuting strategies. These strategies
expand services and provide incentives to travelers to choose transportation
options other than driving alone.
6. Operational and intelligent transportation system (ITS) strategies. These
strategies improve the operation of the transportation system to make better use
of existing capacity.

17

Cambridge Systematics, Inc. (2009) Moving Cooler: An Analysis of Transportation Strategies for Reducing Greenhouse

Gas Emissions.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

19

7. Vehicle efficiency and alternative fuel strategies. These strategies improve the
fuel efficiency of vehicles and increase the use of alternative fuels.
The project team discussed the possibility of developing regionally specific estimates of
the GHG reduction potential of the mitigation measures presented in Moving Cooler.
However, the group eventually elected not to pursue this option due to limitations in the
availability of necessary data, time, and resources. Instead, stakeholders discussed and
voted on the most important and feasible strategies at the Pilot Project’s November
2010 workshop, described in more detail in Section IV. The results of this poll are
presented in Appendix G: Priority Transportation Strategies for Cape Cod.

Baseline Data for Scenario Development
The model used to develop the scenarios required baseline transportation and growth
data.

Transportation Data
Transportation data required for the Pilot Project consisted of the following existing
baseline data, which were used to estimate how changes in specific factors would result
in decreased VMT:



Regional VMT.
Mode choice or share, to calculate GHG emissions from VMT.

Typically, approaches to estimating regional VMT are done using four-step regional
transportation models that consist of the following steps:
1. Trip generation – estimation of the number of trips that occur daily within the
study area.
2. Trip distribution – development of assumptions about trip origins and
destinations.
3. Modal choice or split – estimation of the percentage of trips made by different
modes (e.g., personal vehicle, mass transit, bicycle, walking).
4. Trip assignment – assignment of the trips calculated in steps 1-3 to specific
transportation routes.
Both the Cape Cod Commission and MassDOT have four-step models that cover Cape
Cod and that were used to generate baseline data for the Pilot Project.
However, these regional models may not capture local effects of changes in the urban
design and planning of neighborhoods that can also decrease travel demand.
Consequently, traditional models may be augmented by other approaches, such as the
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

20

5D estimation method, 18 which was used for the Pilot Project. This method enables the
estimation and comparison of local effects on VMT due to five factors: design, density,
diversity, destination accessibility, and distance to transit. These factors can be
measured in a number of ways based on available data. In the case of the Pilot Project,
design was measured as street network density (road miles per square mile), density as
household density (units per acre), diversity as ratio of population to jobs, destination
accessibility as distance of neighborhoods to other regional destinations, and distance to
transit as number of people served by transit service areas.
The 5D method consisted of the following steps:
1. Measure the factor in the first scenario.
2. Measure the factor in the second scenario.
3. Calculate the percent change.
4. Multiply by a specific variable elasticity to calculate related decreases in VMT.
Generally, elasticity is a ratio used to measure the change of one variable due to
another variable. The 5D method measures the responsiveness of changes in VMT to
one of the 5D variables. So, for every percent increase in any one D, there is a related
decrease in VMT. The elasticity assumptions used were taken from a meta-analysis
completed by Reid Ewing and Robert Cervero. 19 Cape Cod-specific assumptions were not
available at the time of the study, but these elasticities are easily adjustable within the
scenario planning tool (CommunityViz) analysis.
For mode choice, the transportation model available included the following mode
categories:
1. Passenger Vehicles
2. Light Duty Vehicles
3. Medium Trucks
4. Heavy Trucks
Bicycle, pedestrian, and transit were not included. Due to the lack of available regional
mode share data, no assumptions were made for these missing modes and no change in
mode share was assumed for any of the scenarios. However, VMT reductions due to
people shifting from driving to biking or walking for short trips were implicitly captured

18

Ewing, R., and R. Cervero. 2010. Travel and the built environment. Journal of the American Planning Association 76(3):
265-294.
19

2010

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

21

in the 5D analysis. Assumptions about transit mode shift can be revisited in the future.
The Technical Scenario Report contains more information on this topic.

Growth Assumptions
Future projected growth values for households and employment were held constant
across scenarios to provide a one-to-one comparison of any differences among the
scenarios. The growth values were derived from U.S. Census 2000 projections for 2030
new growth in population, employment, and households (see Table 1). These figures
were the best available data at the time and were vetted with the Cape Cod
Commission, which did not have alternative estimates. However, the projections were
based on previous periods of rapid growth and are thus considered overestimated. The
2010 Census, which became available after the project was complete, provides an
update to the growth trend and shows a decrease in growth for the study area over the
past 10 years. 20 The assumption for growth is variable and can be changed in the
analysis for future use.
Table 1: Population, Employment and Household Estimates Used in Analysis
Growth Type

Base Year (2008)

Horizon Year (2030)

Delta (2030 - 2008)

Population

224,335

284,335

60,000

Households

95,660

123,660

28,000

Employment

91,238

107,738

16,500

The baseline data and the estimates for future growth did not include the summer and
winter fluctuations on the Cape. Neither Census projections nor the supplied
transportation modeling results included summer population and employment. The
scenario planning consultant did develop some multiplier assumptions by town for
summer population increases based on available summer population estimates and
vacant home data from the U.S. Census. However, similar data on seasonal employment
were not available. Thus, the Pilot Project did not incorporate seasonal and therefore
recreational data but did identify ways in which that data could be validated and used in
the future.

20

Massachusetts 2010 Census Official Population Numbers. http://www.sec.state.ma.us/census/barnstable.htm

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

22

Observations and Recommendations
Assessing Data Requirements

Observation 7: Scenario planning is an inherently data-intensive process and can

require data beyond what some regions already have. Introducing a climate change
mitigation and adaptation focus to the Pilot Project added a layer of complexity and
uncertainty to the data collection. As a pilot project, it was initially unclear what data
would be necessary to complete the preliminary scenario development and indicator
analysis as well as what data would be available and feasible to access or develop within
the time and resource constraints of the project.


R ecom m endation: Develop a clear understanding of what minimum baseline
data are needed and assess what data are available in advance of selecting a
scenario planning consultant or holding a workshop. The assessment should
consider any pending data releases or updates, such as Census or GIS. In
addition, plan for an adequate amount of time to conduct the data collection (a
period of four to six months is recommended). Data collection activities should
involve checking with all key stakeholders to collect relevant/important data and
identifying alternatives or proxies for data that is not readily available. If certain
types of data are lacking and suitable proxies are unavailable, acknowledge this
fact early and assess alternative strategies.

Assessing Sea-Level Rise Impacts

Observation 8: Models that anticipate the effects of SLR on coastal areas are generally

not location-specific and do not take into account coastal dynamics at a highly localized
scale. The Pilot Project was able to account for the specific factors affecting Cape Cod
by creating a locally-defined vulnerability map through an expert elicitation, but the
resulting map did not provide projections on the magnitude of the impact. The Technical
Committee and coastal and climate scientists involved in the expert elicitation ultimately
determined that producing specific estimates of SLR for sub-regions of Cape Cod was
not feasible given currently available data and that collecting the necessary data was
beyond the scope and budget of the Pilot Project.


R ecom m endation: Evaluate whether existing climate change impact data and
models are sufficient to determine how to integrate climate change adaptation
into a scenario planning exercise. Numerous models are available and are used
nationally for predicting the impact of SLR by simulating the dominant processes
and forecasting long-term effects. If existing tools are not sufficient, assess the
amount of time and level of resources available to develop local or regional
models. 21 Greater levels of time and resources should increase the precision and

Additional tools and resources for evaluating climate change effects, including the Coastal Inundation Mapping
Guidebook and Technical Considerations for Use of Geospatial Data in Sea Level Change Mapping and Assessment, are
available through the NOAA Coastal Services Center Digital Coast website (http://www.csc.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/).
21

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

23

accuracy of estimates, though the current state of climate science will ultimately
limit both.
Climate change adaptation may also be incorporated into a scenario planning
exercise using the risk-mitigation scenario planning approach described in
Section II. Participants may be presented with several possible SLR and climate
change effect scenarios, ranging from mild to severe, and then be asked to
identify strategies that enable them to successfully adapt to each.

Developing GHG Mitigation Measures

Observation 9: Not all GHG mitigation measures will be feasible – politically,

financially, or otherwise. Furthermore, local agencies in the project area may not have
the authority or ability to implement certain measures. Strategies to reduce GHG
emissions can focus on VMT reduction, fuel efficiency, vehicle technology, or operational
efficiency. With the exceptions of VMT reduction, technology of local government fleet
vehicles, development of alternative fuel stations, and some implementation of ITS,
these are primarily the purview of the state and federal governments. VMT reduction is
the primary mechanism through which local and regional land use and transportation
investment decisions can have an impact. The impact of density, land use mix, and
transit access on VMT can be modeled and assessed easily in scenario planning. Actions
that aim to change behavior through pricing, incentives and other means are more
difficult to model, and need additional time and resources to integrate into the scenario
planning process.


R ecom m endation : Decide whether the scenario planning exercise will explore
all potential GHG mitigation measures or only those that are determined to be
realistic at a given, selected scale (e.g., the local level). Feasibility may be
determined prior to a scenario planning workshop or during it. In the case of the
Pilot Project, prior to the workshop, the Technical Committee eliminated
measures it believed were infeasible, while discussion and voting during the
workshop further narrowed the list. Involvement from state or federal partners in
discussions of GHG reduction strategies may be valuable, particularly when
considering strategies outside the control of a local or regional agency.

Observation 10: General estimates for the emission reduction potential of mitigation
measures exist. The report Moving Cooler, for instance, presents national and some
regional estimates for a variety of GHG emissions mitigation measures. However, such
estimates are not transferable to the unique characteristics of Cape Cod. Development
of Cape Cod-specific estimates would have required significant investment of time and
resources and the availability of detailed data sets. Therefore, GHG mitigation measures
other than VMT reduction were not incorporated into the scenario development process.


R ecom m endation: Identify feasible options for integrating GHG mitigation into
the scenario planning process. If seeking specific estimates of GHG reduction
potential, allow sufficient time and resources to develop these. Generally,
additional research into applying GHG reduction estimates for specific measures
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

24

at a regional or sub-regional level is needed for them to be fully integrated into a
scenario planning exercise. If developing specific estimates is infeasible, a
facilitated discussion to identify opportunities and barriers to implementing
specific measures may suffice.

Developing Baseline Data

Observation 11: The Pilot Project originally intended to focus on a place characterized
by the presence of both gateway communities and seasonal recreational travel. The
peak summer population of Cape Cod is believed to be triple the year-round population.
Accounting for a more precise interpretation of this trend into the Pilot Project’s refined
scenario would have had a drastic impact on VMT and GHG emissions. However,
seasonal fluctuations in Cape Cod’s population and travel patterns were not sufficiently
captured in the scenario planning process due to lack of data and the difficulty in
quantifying recreational travel demand.


R ecom m endation: Any tourism destination or gateway community region

considering GHG mitigation should assess visitation data and determine what
may be possible to model. A location that experiences as significant an increase
in population during peak travel times as Cape Cod would benefit greatly from
developing and evaluating a scenario that precisely and thoroughly explores the
effects of seasonality on indicator performance.

Observation 12: The transportation model used for the Pilot Project did not have data

on bicycle, walking, or transit mode share. The 5D analysis used was able to account for
some mode shift to bicycle and walking, but proposed changes to transit service
frequency did not result in any changes in assumptions about mode split within the
scenario planning model.


R ecom m endation: Make assumptions in the scenario planning model about
how increases in transit service frequency would result in mode shift. On Cape
Cod, it is likely that the full impact of increased transit access was not captured
in the indicator performance of the refined scenario. For regions interested in
pursuing increased transit ridership as a means to reduce VMT and associated
GHG emissions, capturing the full effects of this shift in a preferred scenario
could build support for expanded transit service.

Observation 13: During the scenario planning workshop, participants expressed
concern over the accuracy of baseline data, particularly with the amount of growth in
jobs and housing that they were being asked to allocate. Participants suggested that the
growth figures being used were too high, as the projections were based on previous
periods of rapid growth. Additionally, in some instances, participants’ questions
regarding the presentation of the information on potential areas vulnerable to SLR
diverted their concentration from evaluating the tradeoffs between growth placement,
climate change adaptation and mitigation, resource protection, and identifying
opportunities for the future.
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

25



R ecom m endation: One value of scenario planning is that it relies on relative

comparisons between scenarios. Thus, even if the absolute numbers are not
accurate or need to be changed, the relative results can still be used to compare
different actions. Furthermore, scenario planning may raise awareness among
participants about limitations and gaps in available data.
Another key strength of the scenario planning process is the ability of
participants to consider the implications of their actions for a specific set of
indicators. When participants in a scenario planning exercise focus too intently
on the accuracy of the data – as occurred to some degree in the Pilot Project – it
can compromise their decision-making process. Validating projection figures with
stakeholders prior to the scenario planning should prevent this from happening
and ensure that the exercise is realistic. Addressing these issues will save time,
avoid confusion, and make participants more informed and effective in their
actions.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

26

Scenario Development
This section details what land use and transportation scenarios were developed and the
process by which they were developed. The Pilot Project resulted in the development of
10 scenarios, consisting of the following:
1-5.

Five preliminary scenarios developed by scenario planning consultant for
demonstrative purposes, consisting of:
1. Trend
2. Dispersed – Standard Transportation
3. Dispersed – Enhanced Transportation
4. Targeted – Standard Transportation
5. Targeted – Enhanced Transportation

6-9.

Four scenarios developed by stakeholder participants at the November 2010
workshop

10.

One refined scenario developed by stakeholders after the workshop

All the scenarios involved the placement of population and employment based on the
growth assumptions described in the previous section. Placement involved the use of
digital “chips,” or map point features attributed and symbolized with various sizes to
represent quantities of households and employment (see Figure 4). In workshop
exercises and in developing the refined scenario, participants placed the chips
themselves, while in the preliminary scenarios, the scenario planning consultant placed
chips in a mostly automated fashion with a subsequent review by the project team. Any
reference to chips in this report regards the digital representations of households and
employment as shown in Figure 4. For all scenarios, placement was not permitted within
the Cape Cod National Seashore boundaries, reflecting the assumption that such land
will not be available for development.
In addition to population and employment placement, the workshop and refined
scenario involved the placement of new transit stops and the ability to change the
frequency, or headways, of the service.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

27

Figure 4: The CommunityViz Style Palette contained different sized “chips” that represented
numbers of dwelling units and employees, or new jobs, available for participants to place
during the Pilot Project's scenario planning workshop in November 2010. Source: PlaceM atters

and Placew ays.

Preliminary Scenarios
The consultant team prepared five preliminary scenarios to demonstrate the possible
range of future scenarios. The five scenarios consisted of the Trend scenario, which
continued historic growth patterns into the future, and four that were combinations of
two levels of development intensity and two levels of transportation investment (see
Figure 5). The two levels of development intensity were intended to showcase “extreme”
scenarios: dispersed/even growth and intense/focused growth. The Dispersed scenario
followed a spread-out distribution of development, using a random allocation. The
Targeted scenario allocated new development to existing high density residential areas
and commercial and industrial centers, based on town Land Use Vision Maps (LUVMs) 22

22
As part of the recent Cape Cod Regional Policy Plan, the Cape Cod Commission has been working with the 15 towns in
Barnstable County to develop LUVMs with the following land uses identified: Economic Centers, Villages Industrial and
Service Trade Areas, Resource Protection Areas, and Other Areas. At the time of the development of the Targeted
scenario, eight of the 15 municipalities had adopted LUVMs.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

28

where they existed and zoning where they did not. The change in housing density from
existing (2008) conditions for these three scenarios is shown in Figure 6.
The two levels of transportation, shown in Figure 7, consisted of:


Standard – Included existing transit plus the following additional improvements,
which are being planned by the Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority:
 New Bourne-Sandwich bus route
 Commuter train running from Boston, MA region to Harwich, MA



Enhanced – Standard plus unplanned stops and routes placed based on where
future densely populated areas of Cape Cod without transit were located under
each of the development scenarios. Eight additional stops were placed for the
Dispersed scenario and six were placed for the Targeted scenario.

Trend

Figure 5: Visual matrix of transportation choices crossed with development intensity. Source:

PlaceM atters and Placew ays.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

29

Trend

Dispersed

Targeted

Figure 6: Trend, Dispersed, and Targeted Scenarios – Change in Density from Baseline
Household Density. Source: PlaceM atters and Placew ays.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

30

Standard

Enhanced – Dispersed

Enhanced – Targeted

Figure 7: Standard and Enhanced Transit Scenarios. Source: PlaceM atters and Placew ays.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

31

Workshop Scenarios
The one-and-a-half day workshop was held on November 15 and 16, 2010. The
purposes of the workshop were to facilitate discussion on the Pilot Project’s focus among
the multiple agencies, introduce the concept of scenario planning and the software tool,
and develop future transportation and land use scenarios that took into account change
considerations that could then be consolidated into one proposed vision.

Representation and Involvement
The primary audience for the scenario planning workshops consisted of town and
regional administrative and planning staff. As these individuals will ultimately be
responsible for integrating the outcomes of the scenario planning pilot into long range
planning efforts, their involvement in the workshops was vital to the success of the
project’s process. The project team worked closely with the Cape Cod Commission to
identify administrators, assistant administrators, and planners from each of Cape Cod’s
fifteen towns, and to invite them to participate in the workshops. Other local participants
included staff from the MPOs on Martha’s Vineyard and Nantucket, and a representative
from the Massachusetts Military Reservation, a military base that occupies a large area
of land in the Upper Cape sub-region.
Members of both the Planning Group and Technical Committee were also invited to
attend the workshop, though only those members whose work related directly to Cape
Cod were asked to contribute to scenario development (for instance, Cape Cod National
Seashore planning staff). Federal and state agency representatives from both groups
were asked to attend as observers and resources in case questions arose related to
federal or state support.
Final representation at the workshop was as follows:






16 Local Government Staff – Towns of Barnstable, Brewster, Chatham,
Falmouth, Harwich, Mashpee, Sandwich, and Truro; Martha’s Vineyard
Commission and Nantucket Planning Office.
Nine Regional Government Staff – Cape Cod Commission, Cape Cod Regional

Transit Authority.

Two State Government Staff – Massachusetts National Guard, Massachusetts

Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs.

16 Federal Government Staff – Environmental Protection Agency (Region 1),
Federal Emergency Management Agency (Region 1), Federal Highway
Administration (Headquarters, Federal Lands Highway, and MA Division Office),
Federal Transit Administration (Region 1), Fish and Wildlife Service
(Headquarters and Region 5), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(North Atlantic Region), National Park Service (Headquarters, Northeast Region,
and Cape Cod National Seashore).
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

32



Five Scientific Experts – Provincetown Center for Coastal Studies, U.S. Geological

Survey, Water Energy & Ecology Information Services, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve.

The Pilot Project elected not to host a public meeting to develop a scenario as, given the
size of the region and the scope of the project, targeting town staff was determined to
be a more effective approach. However, a public involvement approach may be
preferable in a smaller region or as a step in an iterative scenario development process.

Use of Technology
For the stakeholder workshop, the consultant team provided four laptop computers
loaded with CommunityViz and relevant baseline data (population density, land use,
transportation system, and conservation, water resource protection, historic
preservation, and climate change vulnerable areas). Each laptop was also connected to
a novel display and interaction system developed by PlaceMatters’ Decision Lab, which
allowed participants to view and interact with CommunityViz as though it were a
tabletop map (see Figure 8).

Figure 8: Workshop participants navigated CommunityViz and allocated projected new housing
and employment units in CommunityViz using infrared pens, a Nintendo Wii remote, and a
vertically-mounted projector. Source: Volpe Center.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

33

Workshop Agenda
The workshop occurred over one and a half days. The full agenda can be found in
Appendix H: Scenario Planning Workshop Agenda. During the first day, representatives
from the project’s federal and regional partner agencies expressed their interest in the
project and their expectations for its outcomes. Experts from the Technical Committee
also made brief presentations on issues central to the project and Cape Cod, including
GHG emissions, SLR and climate change impacts, VMT, transit ridership, and, as
mentioned previously, water resources, which were not originally a focus area but were
included as performance indicators.
The scenario planning consultant then provided an overview of the scenario planning
process and presented the preliminary scenarios that it developed prior to the workshop.
The consultant also conducted several polling exercises to establish demographic
information about attendees and to identify the issues of highest priority on Cape Cod
(see Figure 9 and Table 2). These issues matched the performance indicators described
in Section III. Regional stakeholders identified preservation of (1) water resources and
(2) critical habitat and conservation areas as the top two issues for Cape Cod; the four
climate change issues identified by the Pilot Project’s initiators ranked third through sixth
in the polling exercise. The top two issues have significant and immediate implications
for the placement of development and the polling results indicate a need for Cape Cod
to work to integrate water resource considerations more thoroughly into future iterations
of the scenario planning model and process.

Figure 9: Results of polling exercise to identify the issues of highest priority on Cape Cod; poll
administered during November 2010 Scenario Planning Workshop; participants were asked to
identify their top two issues. Source: PlaceM atters and Placew ays.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

34

Table 2: Results of polling exercise
Priority

Percent of participants

Water Quality and Supply

40%

Avoid Development in Critical Habitat and Conservation Areas

16%

Reduce Traffic and VMT

13%

Avoid Development in Vulnerable Areas

10%

Reduce Cape's GHG Emissions and Air Pollution

9%

Increase Access to Transit and Non-motorized Vehicles

7%

Access to Services and Employment

4%

Protect Integrity of Historical Preservation Areas

1%

Following these introductory presentations, local stakeholders divided into four groups
based on their region of Cape Cod (see Figure 10) and used the scenario planning
software, CommunityViz, to identify areas requiring protection, areas able to
accommodate growth in housing and employment, and transportation needs and
challenges (see Figure 11). This exercise was conducted as a primer to the second day’s
activities, and emphasized discussion about important protection, development, and
transportation issues over the use of technology-based scenario planning tools.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

35

Martha’s
Vineyard

Nantucket

Figure 10: During the first day of the scenario planning workshop, local stakeholders divided
into breakout groups based on the four sub-regions of Cape Cod. Representatives from
Nantucket and Martha’s Vineyard were assigned to the Mid Cape and Upper Cape respectively
based on the primary ferry service routes (Woods Hole to Martha’s Vineyard and Hyannis to
Nantucket). Source: Volpe Center.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

36

Figure 11: Resulting mark-up of regional map from the first day’s breakout groups by subregion of Cape Cod. Green indicates
conservation areas, red major areas of development, and blue important transit needs. Source: PlaceM atters and Placew ays.

Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

37

On the workshop’s second day, stakeholders reconvened and, following a brief recap of
the activities of the first day, divided into breakout groups with mixed sub-regional
representation in order to develop scenarios for the entire region. A representative from
the consultant team joined each breakout group to operate CommunityViz and facilitate
the exercise. First, the groups were asked to allocate 28,000 new households and
16,500 jobs, projections developed for 2030 based on the 2000 U.S. Census projection.
Participants were able to view various data layers within the GIS interface, including
areas vulnerable to SLR and other climate change impacts, water resources areas,
historic preservation areas, high priority conservation areas, transit and highway routes,
and existing population and employment density. Participants used CommunityViz tools
to allocate new household and job chips throughout the region and keep track of chips
remaining. Figure 12 and Figure 13 shows the resulting chip distribution for all four of
the breakout groups at the Workshop.

Figure 12: Legend for the Workshop Group maps.

Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

38

Group A

Group B

Group C

Group D

Figure 13 Workshop group maps, displaying the placed housing (green) and employment (red)
“chips.”

Once each breakout group allocated all of the projected new housing units and jobs,
they were asked to modify Cape Cod’s existing transit system by adjusting the frequency
of existing routes and designating new stops based on allocations of new population and
employment.
Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

39

After each of these exercises, where time permitted, the CommunityViz model was
refreshed so that participants could evaluate the indicator performance of the decisions
they had made. The resulting maps from each of the breakout groups can be found in
the accompanying Technical Scenario Report.
Following the development of the breakout group scenarios, one facilitator met with
representatives from each of the breakout groups to consolidate the four scenarios into
one refined scenario, described in more detail below. During this time, the rest of the
workshop participants discussed the list of potential GHG emission measures described
in Section III. The results of this discussion are described below. The workshop
concluded with a presentation by the refined scenario group and a discussion of
anticipated next steps.

Incorporation of Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation
The workshop scenario development accounted for climate change mitigation and
adaptation in several ways. Participants were able to impact GHG emissions through the
scenario planning exercise using CommunityViz by making predictions about the future
location of new households, jobs, and transit stops. These predictions resulted in
changes to the 5Ds and consequently in changes to VMT and then GHG emissions. For
adaptation, participants were able to view the layer identifying areas on Cape Cod
vulnerable to the anticipated effects of climate change, as discussed in Section III, as
they placed new housing and employment units.
Additionally, workshop participants discussed and voted on the list of potential GHG
emission measures described in Section III. The list was used as a starting point to
facilitate discussions among town planners and regional stakeholders on what actions to
pursue. These measures were not integrated directly into the refined scenario but
nonetheless spurred discussion among a diverse group of stakeholders. While
representatives from each breakout group met to consolidate their scenarios, the other
workshop participants discussed the proposed strategies, noting challenges and
opportunities for each. Feedback on specific strategy categories included:


Pricing strategies. Participants recognized opportunities to institute congestion or
variable pricing strategies, particularly on the Sagamore and Bourne bridges.
They noted, however, that such strategies typically lack political and public
support. The group discussed various options for how to use the revenue
generated from the pricing strategies, including using the revenue raised to
address water resource issues. The group also discussed using pricing strategies
to incentivize use of alternative fueled vehicles.



Non-motorized strategies. Expanding bike trails may not reduce roadway VMT
and could actually increase VMT if people are motivated to travel to Cape Cod to
use the bike trails. In order for non-motorized strategies to be effective, actions
should be geared towards improving on-road bicycling accessibility or expanding
the existing recreational bicycle trails so that they connect to population centers.
Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

40

Participants identified Route 6A as a roadway that needs better bicycle
accommodations, such as a wider shoulder.


Land use and smart growth strategies. Incorporating low-impact development
requirements into local building codes would not only reduce GHG emissions but
would also likely benefit water quality on Cape Cod, which is a top concern.
Participants also suggested developing a fund for affordable housing near transit
and urban centers.



Public transportation strategies. Participants noted that residents and seasonal
visitors might not be aware of the local public transportation options or how to
use the public transportation system. Participants suggested that the Chamber of
Commerce promote mass transit by working with lodging providers and other
businesses to provide information and incentives to use public transportation.
Other suggestions included reintroducing passenger rail service to the region in
order to provide visitors with other car-free travel options. 23



Operational and ITS strategies. Cape Cod towns have had recent success with
using ITS to manage congestion. Variable message signs and other ITS
technologies were a major factor in managing the congestion associated with the
Sagamore and Bourne bridge closures in 2010 for repair work. Additional ITS
technologies could help reduce congestion further. Participants also suggested
increasing the movement of freight and goods by water to help reduce roadway
congestion.



Alternative fuels strategies. Workshop participants noted that the region’s high
electricity costs may limit the market for electric vehicles. In order to support an
alternatively fueled vehicle market, the region will need to develop the
appropriate fueling and/or recharging infrastructure and build the knowledge
base to service such vehicles.

Following the general discussion of the proposed strategies, participants voted for the
top two strategies that they believed would be the most effective and feasible for Cape
Cod. Five different polls were taken: one for the Cape Cod region as a whole, and one
each for the Upper-, Mid-, Lower-, and Outer Cape sub-regions. 24 Appendix G: Priority
Transportation Strategies for Cape Cod presents the polling results for all areas.
Public transportation strategies ranked highest in each poll, with land use strategies
scoring second highest for all regions except the Outer Cape. While ITS strategies did

23 Since the date of the workshop, the Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority has issued a Request for
Proposals for a study of passenger rail to Cape Cod, to be completed by 2012.
24 Certain

representatives from the towns and the Cape Cod Commission did not participate in this
pole, as they were involved in consolidating the breakout group scenarios into a single, refined
scenario.

Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

41

not receive any votes for the region as a whole, it did score high in the Outer and Upper
Cape sub-regions. Alternative fuel strategies did not receive votes in any of the polls.
As the group discussion and polling results demonstrate, regional and local governments
on Cape Cod will need to pursue a range of GHG reduction strategies, each tailored to
the specific context of the local community.

Refined Scenario
A refined scenario, which drew upon the results of the scenario planning workshop, was
produced through a series of meetings and exchanges involving staff from the Cape Cod
Commission, Cape Cod National Seashore, and Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority, and
town planners, from November 2010 through March 2011. The meetings to develop the
refined scenario consisted of:


November 2010. An initial meeting at the scenario planning workshop to allocate

population by proportion for each of the towns. Transit was not discussed due to
time constraints and the absence of Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority staff.



December 2010. An interactive webinar at the Cape Cod Commission that
allowed participants to continue the growth distribution exercise remotely, with
technical support from the scenario planning consultant. This refined the
scenario further, but participants were unable to finish all chip placements as
some of the towns were not represented.



February 2011. A meeting of the Cape Cod Commission, Cape Cod National
Seashore, and Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority to discuss future transit
possibilities, drawing upon input produced during the workshop and previous and
ongoing regional and local planning efforts.



February-March 2011. Additional outreach by the project team and Cape Cod

Commission to obtain town buy-in through in-person meetings and directly
solicited feedback.

In recognition that the conditions on and data for Cape Cod are evolving, participants
involved in developing the refined scenario agreed that the refined scenario will be used
as the foundation to inform further conversations and changes in the future, and should
not be considered an unalterable scenario.
Figure 14 shows the change in household density in the Refined scenario from existing
(2008) conditions. For transit, the same assumptions as for the Standard transit scenario
(see Figure 7) were used, but with a service frequency of 30 minutes, an increase from
the existing 60 minutes.

Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

42

Figure 14: Refined Scenario, Change in Density from Baseline Household Density. Source:

PlaceM atters and Placew ays.

Observations and Recommendations
Use of Technology

Observation 14: The scenario planning workshop utilized innovative technology
designed to allow participants to view data and interact directly with the software
planning tool. However, due to the complexity of the technology, it required additional
setup time and also required some unconventional facility characteristics, including high
ceilings and no halogen light bulbs. 25 More importantly to the scenario planning process,
most workshop participants faced a learning curve to operate the software using the
infrared pens, and the innovative and novel technology partially overshadowed the
process.

25
PlaceMatters also offers a more self-contained “touch table” whose setup is less complicated and does not demand
these facility requirements. The Pilot Project elected not to use this option due to the added cost and difficulty of
transporting these setups to Cape Cod.

Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

43

R ecom m endation: Evaluate whether and how to use advanced technology to

allow participants to build a scenario during a workshop. As part of this decision,
weigh the implications for time allocation and process against the ability to
display volumes of data easily, quickly, and dynamically. Furthermore,
computerized tools will likely be necessary for the analysis of any scenario and
can provide benefits, but it may be useful to consider a mix of computerized and
manual processes.

Regardless of the role that technology will play, introducing the technology, data,
and process via webinar prior to a workshop would familiarize participants ahead
of time and save time, avoid confusion, and make participants more informed
and effective in their actions, as discussed in Observation 13. Other aspects of
the scenario planning process are also possible to conduct via webinar, but given
the rich conversations that took place during the Pilot Project’s stakeholder
workshop, at least one in-person meeting is preferable.

Workshop Exercises
Designing the scenario planning workshop is a critical step in the process. It is important
to consider the amount of time needed for participants to effectively complete each
exercise and whether scheduling additional follow up workshops would helpful.

Observation 15: During the scenario planning exercise, the breakout groups allocated
housing and jobs and proposed changes to regional transit facilities. Although the model
included a number of data layers that could have informed the allocations, participants
did not have time to review or reference them. In addition, each group was only able to
evaluate the impact that their choices had on the various performance indicators once
during the exercise due to the amount of time needed to refresh the indicators. This
made it difficult for participants to understand the relationship between the placement of
jobs, housing and transit facilities, and the consequences of those decisions, as captured
by the performance indicators.


R ecom m endation: Allow enough time during the scenario development
exercises for participants to take advantage of all data layers available and to
refresh the model several times so that workshop participants can see the
impacts of their choices on indicator performance. One of the values of the
scenario planning process is in trying one strategy, seeing the results, and then
revisiting the decisions and referencing relevant data in order to make better
choices. Depending on the software tool being used, enabling specific target
indicators to update instantaneously after each chip placement would better
allow participants to easily evaluate the tradeoffs associated with specific growth
allocations.

Observation 16: The architects of the breakout and final scenarios for the Pilot Project
were mostly town and regional planners. Some of these participants found it difficult to
freely place chips outside the context of existing zoning regulations and planning
Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

44

proposals. As a result, much of the projected growth was allocated within existing
zoning parameters.


R ecom m endation: Clear demarcations of areas that cannot accommodate

growth, such as those with sensitive natural resources or that federal agencies
own, should be made early in the process. However, it is also important to
determine whether these restrictions should be considered fixed or variable. That
is, consider whether participants should place growth based on current zoning
restrictions or whether they should place growth under the assumption that
these zoning restrictions could change during the scenario horizon. The
designated time horizon, therefore, represents a large component of the
consideration as to whether the intent of the process is to allocate growth in a
realistic manner according to existing constraints or under the assumption that
the constraints may change in the future. A 20-year time horizon may lead
stakeholders to the former approach, while a 100-year time horizon to the latter.
The timeline also has implications for assumptions about climate change effects,
such as SLR.

Observation 17: The rules of the scenario planning exercise asked participants to

place all 28,000 new housing units and 16,500 new employment units within rigid time
bounds. Participants in certain breakout groups were rushed to finish on time.
Participants noted that due to the sizes of the chips (with the largest chip size only
allocating 1,000 units at a time) it was difficult to fully allocate all the chips in the
allotted time.


R ecom m endation: Balance the practices of scenario planning against the need

for “good planning.” Workshop participants should not be forced to allocate a
strict amount of growth under time pressure; considering the tradeoffs between
indicators should be a thoughtful exercise. Be sure to allow an appropriate
amount of time for each exercise, and consider increasing the “size” of the chips
so that participants can allocate growth efficiently.

Observation 18: The scenario development was set up so that one subgroup of

workshop participants was responsible for developing a final scenario based on the
scenarios developed by each of the four breakout groups. However, it was impossible
for the subgroup to thoroughly consolidate the allocations of growth assigned in the
breakout groups into a final scenario due to time constraints and the way the breakout
groups’ information was presented. Instead, the group assigned growth to a new map
using the breakout scenarios as references. As a result, the growth allocations the
breakout groups made did not directly translate into the final scenario, which required
additional input from stakeholders after the workshop.


R ecom m endation: Identify a systematic way to develop a final scenario so that

it is directly representative of workshop participants’ intentions. This can be
accomplished in a number of ways, but the following three are recommended
based on the Pilot Project experience: (1) If developing several individual
scenarios in breakout groups, identify a geospatial analysis technique that can
systematically “average” the placement of growth from each group. (2) Organize
Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

45

breakout groups by sub-region of the focus area. After assembling the subregions into a single map and calculating overall indicator performance, ask the
entire group of stakeholders to validate the comprehensive map. 3) Instead of
breakout groups, have one group composed of individuals who can represent
each sub-region of the focus area and allocate growth for their sub-region. Once
the map is evaluated overall, the group can discuss how best to improve the
overall region’s performance by making sub-region adjustments.

Observation 19: Because estimates for the emission reduction potential of mitigation

measures at the local level do not exist for Cape Cod, consideration of mitigation was
limited to making changes in density, land use placement, and transit access during the
scenario planning exercise and a discussion of potential GHG emissions reduction
measures.


R ecom m endation: Incorporate climate change mitigation into the scenario
planning exercise by providing information on mitigation strategies prior to the
scenario development and by applying GHG emissions targets or objectives
during the exercise. For instance, participants at the Cape Cod workshop could
have discussed potential mitigation options prior to developing scenarios so that
it could have impacted the decisions of workshop participants. In addition,
participants could have been asked to place all projected new housing and
employment units and achieve a target level of GHG emission reduction.

Observation 20: During the scenario development, local participants noted in passing

that several existing population and employment centers located within vulnerable areas
are dependent on existing state and/or federal transportation infrastructure. Time was
not built into the workshop agenda to discuss the implications of this relationship, nor
were the appropriate state and/or federal representatives present to discuss the
availability of resources or assistance for fortification, rehabilitation, or relocation of
these assets.


R ecom m endation: Allot time for discussion of adaptation options and involve
the relevant decision makers, such as state and federal transportation,
emergency management, and hazard mitigation staff, so they can provide input
on the availability of resources and/or assistance.

Draft Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

46

Assessment of Scenarios
The ten scenarios were assessed using the performance indicators described in Section
III 26 and that were selected based on the Pilot Project’s goals described in Section I.
This section summarizes the overall performance of the scenarios and provides details
on the comparative results for climate change mitigation and adaptation and transit
accessibility, which reflect the primary goals of the Pilot Project. Details and graphs for
the indicators representing the impact of development on other areas of interest can be
found in the Technical Scenario Report.

Overview of Scenario Performance
Overall, the performance of the various scenarios demonstrated tradeoffs between the
mitigation and adaptation indicators, especially in terms of intensifying development in
existing commercial and residential areas that are vulnerable to SLR, and between
indicators representing other land use interests. In comparing the scenarios, it is
important to note the context in which each set – preliminary, workshop, and refined –
were developed, including consideration of realistic expectations, feasibility constraints,
and vetting by local entities. For the workshop, but even more so for the refined
scenario, the goal was to minimize negative impacts and maximize positive impacts, as
measured by each of the indicators, of development and transit placement.


The Trend and Dispersed scenarios resulted in similar results, performing worst
in nearly all categories, except for percentage of new population in historic
areas. Their performance reflects the fact that development is currently following
a dispersed pattern and is not being focused in existing commercial and
residential centers.



The Targeted scenario performed well in nearly all categories; however, it placed
the highest percentage of new population in vulnerable areas. Many of Cape
Cod’s existing high density residential and commercial centers, where
development was placed in the Targeted scenario to increase density and
promote transit-oriented developed, are located in vulnerable areas. For the
same reason, the Targeted scenario also resulted in a relatively high percentage
of new population in historic areas.



The Workshop scenarios varied in their results, reflecting how each breakout
group had different participants and approaches to the exercise. These scenarios
were developed under different conditions than the others, in that they were not
constrained by coordination with pre-existing plans or by feasibility

26

Eight of the 10 scenarios were evaluated for all indicators. The two preliminary scenarios with enhanced transit were
only evaluated against the VMT/GHG emissions and transit accessibility indicators, since their development distributions
were identical to the corresponding standard transit scenarios.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

47

considerations, such as cost and vetting by the responsible local jurisdiction,
which were considered in the development of the Refined scenario. As a result,
although the performance of the Workshop scenarios generally fell between the
Trend/Dispersed scenarios and the Targeted scenario, there were exceptions
where some of the breakout groups were able to implement aggressive changes
that resulted in strong performance, such as Group C’s effective reductions in
VMT and GHG emissions.


The Refined scenario performed well with nearly all the indicators and
outperformed the Targeted scenario in most. Although the Refined scenario
performed well in terms of the percentage of new population in vulnerable areas,
it did not perform well for VMT and GHG emissions, mostly due to the
consideration of feasibility constraints, especially for transit, and of tradeoffs
made for adaptation. It outperformed the Trend and Dispersed scenarios for all
the indicators except percentage of new population in water resource and
wellhead protection areas. However, when the indicator was restricted to low
density development, 27 the Refined scenario performed significantly better than
the Trend and Dispersed scenarios. Indicators for low density development are
included for the water resource and wellhead areas because low density
corresponds to a greater possibility for septic system waste treatment for homes,
which have a greater negative impact on water resource areas and wellhead
areas. These issues underscore the discovery during the scenario planning
workshop of the importance of considering water in planning for development on
Cape Cod and how water management needs to be an important factor in future
transportation, land use, and climate change efforts for the region.

Overview of Priority Indicators
GHG Emissions
The performance of all scenarios in reducing GHG emissions was compared to that of
the Trend scenario as a baseline and was solely based on changes in VMT and not on
changes in technology, fuel, or transportation mode. Therefore, the percentage change
in VMT was the same as the percentage change in GHG emissions for each scenario.
These results are shown in Figure 15.
The Dispersed-Standard scenario performed closest to the Trend scenario, improving by
less than one percent, while the Dispersed-Enhanced scenario performed slightly better.
The other scenarios resulted in a five to eight percent improvement (decrease) in VMT
and GHG emissions, with the two Targeted scenarios and two of the Workshop scenarios
performing best. The Targeted scenarios were expected to perform well in VMT and

27

Developed land is defined as density exceeding one dwelling unit per 10 acres; undeveloped as density equal or below
one dwelling unit per 10 acres.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

48

GHG emissions reduction, since they were designed with the purpose of maximizing the
performance indicator results without a full account of local considerations. The
Workshop scenarios from breakout groups A and C performed well, a result of the
proactive, intense development pattern and high number of additional transit stops
pursued by those participants.
The Refined scenario did not perform as well on this measure, primarily due to the
consideration of feasibility constraints that resulted from consultation with local entities,
including the Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority, on realistic and vetted future
investments. This differed from the Targeted scenario’s limited consideration of
adaptation implications and the Workshop scenarios’ lack of constraints.

Figure 15: Percentage change from Trend scenario in regional VMT and GHG emissions. Source:

PlaceM atters and Placew ays.

Development in Areas Vulnerable to Sea-Level Rise
Figure 16 illustrates how each scenario performed in terms of the percentage of new
population placed in areas that are potentially vulnerable to SLR. The Targeted-Standard
scenario resulted in the highest percentage of new population in vulnerable areas,
reflecting that most of the existing high density residential and commercial centers on
Cape Cod are located in vulnerable areas. Most of the Workshop scenarios as well as the
Refined scenario placed fewer population in vulnerable areas than the Trend scenario.
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

49

Similar to its performance with GHG emissions, the Refined scenario did not perform as
well as the Workshop scenarios, reflecting the additional tradeoffs that stakeholders
considered in refining the scenario in the months following the workshop.

Figure 16: Percentage of New Population in Vulnerable Areas. Source: PlaceM atters and

Placew ays.

Growth in Conservation and Resource-Constrained Areas
Table 3 shows the percentage of new growth placed in areas with identified constraints.
Overall, the Refined scenario performed best for nearly all categories, with the exception
of percentage of land area developed from previously undeveloped or rural and the
percentage of new population in water resource and wellhead protection areas. The
poor performance of the latter seems to indicate that there may be overlap between
sensitive water resource areas and desired development locations identified through this
exercise and that, as discussed in Section IV, water constraints should be considered to
a greater extent in future planning efforts. However, it should be noted that the Refined
scenario performed well in terms of having only a small percentage of new population in
water resource and wellhead in low density areas. In contrast to the GHG emissions and
vulnerability indicators, the Refined scenario performed better than the Workshop
scenarios in most of the resource preservation indicators, reflecting Cape Cod’s
prioritization of conservation areas over climate change mitigation and adaptation
considerations in the short term, as indicated by the poll conducted at the workshop.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

50

Table 3: Indicator results for preservation of natural/existing ecosystems and impact on other areas. One asterisk (*) indicates the
best performing scenario while two asterisks (**) indicate the lowest performing scenario for each indicator.
Preliminary Scenarios
Indicator

Workshop Breakout Group
Scenarios

Refined
Scenario

Trend

Dispersed

Targeted

A

B

C

D

Percentage of new population in critical habitat areas

49.6**

49.6**

20.9

25.7

40.6

31.6

20.7

14.2*

Percentage land area developed (from previously undeveloped or rural) 28

33.3**

29.9

0.0*

1.9

1.7

0.0*

2.8

4.5

Percentage of new population in undeveloped or rural lands

41.1**

36.4

31.1

15.1

35.7

28.6

15.6

12.4*

Percentage of new population in other high priority conservation areas 29

64.4**

62.1

31.4

31.5

54.0

38.2

29.9

25.2*

4.8

5.1

6.4

8.0**

0.4

0.2

1.7

0.1*

Percentage of new population in water resource areas

47.9**

41.4

39.9

21.5*

52.4

43.1

32.0

47.8

Percentage of new population in water resource areas in low density
areas (less than three dwelling units per acre)

41.1**

36.4

31.1

15.1

35.7

28.6

15.6

12.4*

33.4

30.1

36.4

15.5*

32.6

32.9

28.1

42.0**

33.3**

29.9

0.0*

1.9

1.7

0.0*

2.8

4.5

Percentage of new population in historic preservation areas

Percentage of new population in wellhead protection areas
Percentage of new population in wellhead protection areas in low density
areas (less than three dwelling units per acre)

28

Developed land is defined as density exceeding one dwelling unit per 10 acres; undeveloped as density equal or below one dwelling unit per 10 acres.

29

Areas include those designated for open space or conservation by the state, town, or Cape Cod Commission.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

51

Transit Accessibility
The indicators for transit accessibility measured the percentage of new jobs and new
homes within a mile of proposed passenger rail stops and/or a quarter mile from
existing and planned bus stops. As mentioned above, two additional scenarios were
included in these results (Dispersed – Enhanced, and Targeted – Enhanced) because
their assumptions had impacts on transit access. As shown in Figure 17 and Figure 18,
the Enhanced scenarios resulted in higher access than their Standard equivalents for
Dispersed and Targeted respectively, as expected. The Refined scenario did not perform
as well as either of the Enhanced scenarios or the Targeted-Standard scenario, but did
perform better than the Dispersed-Standard and Trend scenarios. It is likely that as
additional planned improvements in the transit system are added to the model – and as
expected mode shift, ridership, and the impact of service frequency increases are better
captured – the Refined scenario will improve in performance.

Figure 17: Percentage of new population served by transit

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

52

Figure 18: Percentage of new jobs served by transit.

Implications of the Refined Scenario
The performance of the scenarios underscores the value of the scenario planning
process as well as the tradeoffs that the town and regional planners of Cape Cod will
need to consider in addressing climate change adaptation and mitigation through land
use planning. For instance, the Refined scenario’s reduction of VMT and the associated
GHG emissions fell short of that achieved by other scenarios due to several likely
reasons. First, as discussed earlier, stakeholders avoided further development of certain
existing high-density areas that were identified as vulnerable. This decision likely
improved the Refined scenario’s performance in the vulnerable areas indicator at the
expense of a more modest reduction of VMT and GHG emissions. Second, the Refined
scenario was constrained by coordination with pre-existing plans, by feasibility
considerations such as cost and vetting by the responsible local jurisdiction, and by
consultation with local entities, including the Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority, on
realistic and vetted future investments. These constraints differed significantly from the
unrestrained exercise conducted during the workshop.
As the regional and local partners use this model in the future, they will be able to
update plans for transit investments and development and measure the projected
impact on VMT and GHG emissions. In the future, water resources can also be
considered in more detail, and the importance of natural resource and ecosystem
preservation can continue to be preserved, reflecting the top priorities indicated in the
poll conducted at the workshop.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

53

Conclusion
This section discusses how well the Pilot Project met the four goals described in Section
I, outlines recommended steps and considerations for future applications of the process,
and reviews the role that various participants – federal, state, regional, and local – can
play in the process.

Goals
Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies to reduce GHG emissions can focus on VMT reduction, fuel efficiency, vehicle
technology, or operational efficiency. VMT reduction is the main area for which local and
regional land use and transportation investment decisions can have an impact. The
impact of density, land use mix, and transit access on VMT can be modeled and
assessed easily in scenario planning and this was accomplished with the Pilot Project.
However, as shown in Figure 15, the resulting reduction in VMT was relatively small and
larger reductions will require other strategies. Actions that aim to change behavior
through pricing, incentives, and other means are more difficult to model, so additional
time and resources would have been necessary to integrate them into the scenario
planning process. Although the Pilot Project was not able to focus on GHG mitigation
strategies for seasonal recreational travel due to data limitations, it was able to
document those limitations and identify actions that the region could take to begin to
model and account for such travel. These actions are documented in a separate action
plan developed for the Cape Cod Commission, as mentioned in Section II.
In addressing adaptation, the Pilot Project found that unless participants have access to
existing data or the time and resources to conduct location-specific modeling, regional
assumptions about climate change impacts will be limited. In addition, the Pilot Project
found that there are other constraints on and considerations for land use development
in addition to SLR and climate change effects – namely protection of water resources
and environmentally sensitive areas. These other considerations should inform and
restrict options for land use development and even, in the case of conservation lands,
be considered as a way to mitigate SLR and other climate change effects.
Although the goals of mitigation and adaptation were treated separately in terms of
modeling baseline assumptions and assessing impacts of development and
transportation assumptions, the Pilot Project found that they were and should be
discussed together, as there can be tradeoffs. Participants in the Pilot Project found that
at times, development decisions that would reduce GHG emissions through changes in
density and job-housing balance would also place new population in vulnerable areas
because of the location of existing residential and commercial centers.
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

54

Scenario Planning
The Pilot Project employed a land use and transportation-focused framework for
scenario planning that reflects how MPOs are using scenario planning and is described in
the FHWA Scenario Planning Guidebook. Stakeholders evaluate several alternative future
scenarios and then select or develop a scenario to serve as a vision. This approach was
selected due its use by MPOs and its applicability to climate change mitigation, in terms
of facilitating the setting of GHG emissions targets and determining land use and
transportation growth patterns that would allow a community to achieve those targets.
Another version of scenario planning is risk-mitigation focused and asks stakeholders to
develop several possible scenarios and then identify strategies that are common to most
or all of them. Risk-mitigation focused scenario planning is also appropriate for
addressing climate change, particularly adaptation, given the debate surrounding the
nature and extent of potential climate change effects. NPS has successfully applied this
approach with several of its land management units to help them plan for projected
climate change impacts.
Although the Pilot Project elected to follow the land use and transportation-focused
approach to scenario planning, future applications of transportation, land use, and
climate change scenario planning may benefit from both approaches. Given that the
former lends itself to climate change mitigation and the latter to adaptation, the most
appropriate approach may be to employ both. For example, the risk-mitigation approach
can be used to develop different scenarios for a range of potential climate change
effects. These scenarios can then be used as data layers to both inform the
development of land use and transportation scenarios and assess these scenarios
alongside indicators for VMT and GHG emissions. How to best employ one or both
approaches should be determined based on the expressed goals of the project, the
relative importance of adaptation and mitigation to stakeholders, and the resources and
expertise available.
Scenario planning provided participants an opportunity to experiment, to explore how
different information overlapped, and to discuss tradeoffs. One of the key benefits of
scenario planning software is its ability to provide fairly immediate feedback on
development and transportation decisions and to provide a tool by which to explore and
test the implications of different decisions. To achieve this in an interactive exercise, it is
important to have the right people in the room and to provide sufficient time to run
updates to the performance indicators.

Interagency Coordination
Participation by multiple agencies ensures the pooling and sharing of expertise and
resources. Given the role of the state in this process, it is important to include state
agencies as well as federal agencies, regional land use and transportation entities
including federal land management agencies, and local stakeholders. Regional or local
entities should be the main initiators of the process as they are in the best position to
assess the data needs, status of planning efforts, and planning priorities for the region.
Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

55

Replicability
The final goal of the Pilot Project was to create a replicable process for other areas to
follow in considering climate change in transportation and land use planning in situations
requiring interagency coordination. This report attempts to outline that process. The
project resulted in information sharing and interest across many federal agencies and in
a variety of public forums throughout the U.S. that should continue after the project’s
completion. The success of this goal will need to be determined in the future.

Timeline, Process, and Roles
The timeline presented in Figure 19 provides an overview of when major milestones for
the Pilot Project occurred. The process captured in Figure 20 was developed based on
the experience of the Pilot Project and the resulting observations and recommendations
presented above. It is also informed by the FHWA Scenario Planning Guidebook as well
as state and regional planning processes, which it is intended to complement, not
replace. The basic steps of issue and goal identification, data collection and analysis,
development of solutions, and assessment of those solutions, with public outreach
throughout the process, are common to all planning processes and were followed for the
Pilot Project, as reflected in Figure 19 and Figure 20.
Table 4 outlines the possible roles and responsibilities of various participants. The Pilot
Project involved a number of participants and developed specific roles and
responsibilities, as described in Section II, but there are a number of ways in which
participants could be organized and take lead and supporting roles and the most
appropriate setup will vary by region.

Summary
The Pilot Project succeeded in bringing together multiple stakeholders and agencies and
in getting people to seriously consider climate change, especially adaptation. The Pilot
Project confirmed that scenario planning is a valuable process for incorporating
important considerations such as climate change into transportation and land use
planning processes. The Pilot Project required significant upfront planning and data
collection, as well as stakeholder outreach, and provided an opportunity to engage a
variety of people and entities in an informed discussion of tradeoffs and priorities. As
previously stated, this project represents one approach to climate change and scenario
planning; other methods exist and can be pursued separately or in concert with this
approach. The successes and lessons learned from the Pilot Project are intended to help
others pursue similar efforts and to advance consideration of climate change in
transportation and land use planning.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

56

Figure 19: Timeline of major milestones for the Pilot Project.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

57

Decisions/Inputs

Phases/Steps

Can we devote sufficient staff time, resources?
Do we have sufficient data quantity and
quality?
Where are we in our planning processes?
How do we want the results of this effort to
inform our planning processes

Multi-agency working
group
Work Plan

Determine goals,
intended outputs,
and expected
outcomes

Why are we commencing this process?
What do we expect to get out of it?
What are our goals?
How do we expect this process to help us reach
those goals?
How do we want the results of this effort to
inform our planning processes?

Goals, Intended Outputs,
Expected Outcomes

Perform data
assessment and
collection

What baseline data do we need?
What data limitations do we have?
How will we acknowledge/account for those
limitations?

Data Inventory
Baseline Transportation
and Land Use Model
Growth and Climate
Change Projections

Communicate and
verify data

Are stakeholders comfortable with our data
sources and projections? If not, how can they
be changed to ensure a satisfactory level of
comfort?

Final Baseline Model and
Projections

Choose a scenario
planning approach
and software tool

How can different approaches to scenario planning
help us achieve our goals?
What are the outputs of each approach to scenario
planning?

Climate Change Effects
GHG Emissions
Transportation
Performance Measures

Risk-MitigationFocused Scenario
Planning
Land Use and
Transportation
Scenario Planning

What variables will
be used in
developing
scenarios?

Potential
Outputs/Outcomes

Elect to pursue a
scenario planning
effort to address
transportation,
land use, and
climate change
How long
is this going to
take?

Who should be
involved?

Questions/Considerations

Conduct
preliminary data
analysis

Conduct
educational
outreach about
scenario planning

How do we want to evaluate the performance
of scenarios?
Do we need to develop preliminary scenarios
to serve as a basis of comparison?

Performance Indicators
Preliminary Scenarios
(baseline, trend, extreme
growth)

Do stakeholders understand how scenario
planning will be used and why it will be helpful?
What are the useful materials to prepare ahead
of time?

Reference materials for
stakeholder workshop/
scenario planning exercise

Who should
participate?

How many
workshops are
necessary? Over
what time period?

Host scenario
planning
workshop/
exercises

What is the agenda?
How much time is necessary to conduct the
exercise and to allow the software tool to
analyze and consolidate the results?

Final Outputs

Figure 20: Diagram of the transportation, land use, and climate change scenario planning
process.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

58

Table 4: Recommended roles and responsibilities.

Local government

Regional
government
(MPO/RPO)

Federal
landowning
agency

State (DOT,
Coastal Zone
Management
Office, other)

Other federal
agency (e.g., EPA,
NOAA, FEMA,
USGS, USACE)

Technical or other consultant
(scenario planning, facilitation,
transportation, etc.)

Overall

Primary. In partnership wherever they co-exist, lead the
process and provide oversight of and outreach to other
participants or delegate to another entity. If not the lead,
respond to requests for participation and data.

Provide technical assistance and
resources, funding support, and
regulatory guidance.

Provide technical services or facilitation
and project management, as determined
by the initiator of the process.

Initiate
process and
define
Project

Primary. The process should begin with the interest of a
local or regional entity with jurisdiction or ownership of
land, in partnership with other local and regional entities.

Provide support in terms of information
on the Pilot Project, related funding, and
other relevant plans or requirements.

Provide support as specified in RFP or
other mechanism.

Facilitate
process

Collect data

Develop
scenarios
Assess
scenarios
Implement
scenario and
strategies

Any of the agencies could be the facilitator of the process, although it is important for the initiator to closely partner with the facilitator.
All participants should contribute to data collection; local and regional agencies including federal land-owning agencies will have relevant local data
but federal and state agencies may have supplemental information as well as methodologies. One entity should be charged with collecting the
data; this could either be done by a technical or other consultant or by one of the other entities taking on that role. Ultimately, the data should
become an in-house resource for the local and regional entities.

Primary. Provide input into the placement of land use and transportation and into the way in which
scenarios are assessed and the final scenario is refined.

Primary. The initiator agency or agencies should take
ownership of next steps.

Support local and regional agencies.

Final Report
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

Technical support. These tasks require
specific software and modeling
knowledge that may require a third party
unless the initiator or partner has the
capacity in-house.
Transfer all data and documentation to
initiator. Provide as needed follow-up
assistance.

59

A Framework for Considering
Climate Change in
Transportation and Land Use
Scenario Planning: Appendices
March 2012

Lessons Learned from an
Interagency Pilot Project on
Cape Cod

Federal Highway Administration
National Park Service
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

Table of Contents
The Interagency Transportation,
Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot
Project utilized a scenario planning
process to develop a multi-agency
transportation- and land use-focused
development strategy for Cape Cod,
Massachusetts, with the intention of
achieving a reduction in future
greenhouse gas emissions and
considering the potential impacts of
sea-level rise on the region. The
outcomes of this scenario planning
process will inform and support the
region’s long-range transportation
planning and other related efforts,
as well as the planning efforts of
local, state, and federal agencies.
Project members collaborated to
document the process followed and
significant observations and
recommendations for future
applications. This information is
presented in this report. The
appendices and a separate
document, the Technical Scenario
Report, developed by the scenario
planning consultants, provide
supporting documentation.

Appendix A: Planning Group and Technical
Committee Charters and Rosters................. 1
Appendix B: Literature Review ........................ 6
Appendix C: Request for Proposal ................. 19
Appendix D: List of Potential Performance
Indicators ................................................ 34
Appendix E: Vulnerable Area Map and Key .... 36
Appendix F: Potential GHG Reduction
Strategies ................................................ 40
Appendix G: Priority Transportation
Strategies for Cape Cod ........................... 46
Appendix H: Scenario Planning Workshop
Agenda ................................................... 48

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

Appendix A: Planning Group and
Technical Committee Charters and
Rosters
Planning Group Charter












Provides general guidance and oversight of the pilot project
Invites participation in the Technical Committee
Incorporates Technical Committee input into decision-making
Guides the development of interim products and results
Reviews deliverables and interim products
Provides input into the crafting of development scenarios for Cape Cod
Attend half-day workshop
Review and inform results
Communicates results and interim findings to federal agencies and other
stakeholders
Helps integrate results into constituent agencies’ long- and short-range plans
Provides feedback on pilot project process and areas for improvement/lessons
learned

Planning Group Roster
Agency
Type

Department

Agency

Office/Division
Office of Natural
Environment

Federal

Federal Highway
Administration

Staff
David Carlson
Diane Turchetta
Becky Lupes

Massachusetts Division
Office

Paul Maloney

Federal Lands Highway

Aung Gye
Adam Schildge

Transportation

Federal Transit
Administration

Office of Planning &
Environment

Liz Zelasko
Katie Grasty
Maryanne Polkiewicz

Region 1

Bill Gordon
Ben Rasmussen

Research and
Innovative
Technology
Administration

Gina Filosa
Volpe Center

Lindsey Morse
David Perlman
Carson Poe

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

1

Agency
Type

Department

Commerce

Agency

National Oceanic
and Atmospheric
Administration

Office/Division
Office of Ocean and Coastal
Resource Management
Estuarine Reserves Division

Staff
Ralph Cantral
Ellen Mecray
Helen Farr
Cory Riley
Kevin Percival

Washington Support Office

Amanda Rutherford
Shawn Norton

National Park
Service

Northeast Region

Bob Holzheimer
Peter Steele
Karst Hoogeboom

Interior

Cape Cod National
Seashore

Lauren McKean
Erin Der-McLeod
Eva Ward

U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service

Refuge Transportation
Program

Steve Suder

Region 5

Jeff Mast

Nathan Caldwell

Mel Cote
U.S.
Environmental
Protection
Agency

Ed Reiner
Region 1

Regina Lyons
Norm Willard
Rosemary Monahan

Homeland
Security

Regional

Defense

Nan Johnson

Federal
Emergency
Management
Agency

Region 1

U.S. Army

Military Surface
Deployment and
Distribution Command

Kevin Merli
Jack Sullivan
Lydia Kachadoorian

Cape Cod Commission
Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority

Doug Briggs
Jason Cowin
Clay Schofield
Julie Quintero-Schulz

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

2

Technical Committee Charter


Provides guidance to Planning Group regarding all technical issues



Identifies resources appropriate for literature review



Assists in data collection (primarily via GIS) and provides information on 1) ways
to integrate greenhouse gas emission mitigation measures into scenarios and 2)
climate change effects and impacts such as:


Effects





Primary focus – Degree of potential sea level rise, storm surges,
and coastal flooding
Secondary focus – Degree of other effects related to climate
change, such as potential temperature, precipitation changes,
groundwater salinization, etc.

Impacts
 Primary focus – Potential impacts on transportation infrastructure
including bridges, roadways, and parking lots
 Secondary focus – Potential impacts on other development
(buildings, water and sewer, etc.)



Provides input into the desired targets, or end goals, for scenarios with regard to
climate change emissions and other outcomes



Provides input into the crafting of development scenarios for Cape Cod




Inform greenhouse gas emission estimates
Attend half-day workshop
Review and inform results



Communicates results and interim findings to state, regional, and local agencies
and other stakeholders



Helps integrate results into constituent agencies’ long- and short-range plans

Technical Committee Roster

Federal

Agency
Type

Agency

Federal Highway
Administration

Office/Division
Central Federal Lands Highway
Division
Office of Natural Environment

Staff
Elijah Henley
Diane Turchetta
Becky Lupes

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

3

Agency
Type

Agency
National Oceanic and
Atmospheric
Administration

Office/Division

Waquoit Bay Coastal Training Program

Staff
Tonna-Marie Rogers
Alison Leschen
Karst Hoogeboom

National Park Service

Cape Cod National Seashore

Mark Adams
Luaren McKean

U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers

U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service

United States
Geological Survey

New England District

John Winkelman

Monomoy National Wildlife Refuge

Dave Brownlie

Eastern Massachusetts National
Wildlife Refuge Complex

Libby Herland

Northeast Region

Paul Phifer

Woods Hole Coastal and Marine
Science Center

Rob Theiler

Department of
Environmental
Protection

Lee Dillard Adams
Christine Kirby
Kathleen Baskin

State

Julia Knisel
Executive Office of
Energy and
Environmental Affairs

Office of Coastal Zone Management

Deerin Babb-Brott
Massachusetts Bays Program

Regional
Local
Academia

NonProfit

Steve McKenna

Jay Baker

Massachusetts
Department of
Transportation

Highway Division

Cape Cod Commission

Transportation Program

Clay Schofield

Town of Falmouth

Department of Public Works

Ray Jack

Louisiana State
University

Southern Climate Impacts Planning
Program and Coastal Sustainability
Studio

Lynne Carter

Bob Frey
Steve Miller

Association to Preserve
Cape Cod

Jo Ann Muramoto

Battelle

Paul Kirschen

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

4

Agency
Type

Agency

Staff

ICLEI - Local
Governments for
Sustainability

Missy Stults

Provincetown Center for
Coastal Studies

Graham Giese

Woods Hole
Oceanographic
Institution

Private

Office/Division

Geology and Geophysics Department

Rob Evans

Marine Policy Center

Porter Hoagland

Water Energy & Ecology
Information Services

Chris Powicki

Crosswalk of Tasks between Groups
Planning
Group

Technical
Committee

Assists in data collection (primarily via GIS) and provides information on 1)
ways to integrate greenhouse gas emission mitigation measures into
scenarios and 2) climate change effects and impacts

Assist

Lead

Communicates results and interim findings to federal, state, regional, and
local agencies and other stakeholders

Share

Share

Guides the development of interim products and results

Lead

Assist

Helps integrate results into constituent agencies’ long- and short-range plans

Share

Share

Incorporates Technical Committee input into decision-making

Lead

Identifies resources appropriate for literature review

Assist

Invites participation in the Technical Committee

Lead

Provides feedback on pilot project process and areas for
improvement/lessons learned

Lead

Provides general guidance and oversight of the pilot project

Lead

Task

Provides guidance to Planning Group regarding all technical issues

Lead

Lead

Provides input into the crafting of development scenarios for Cape Cod

Share

Share

Provides input into the desired targets, or end goals, for scenarios with
regard to climate change emissions and other outcomes

Assist

Lead

Reviews deliverables and interim products

Lead

Assist

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

5

Appendix B: Literature Review
Inter-Agency Climate Change
Scenario Planning Pilot Project
List of References with Annotations for Highly Relevant
Resources
July 14, 2010
REGIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS
Frumhoff, P.C., J.J. McCarthy, J.M. Melillo, S.C. Moser, and D.J. Wuebbles
(2007). Confronting Climate Change in the U.S. Northeast: Science, Impacts,
and Solutions. Synthesis report of the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment
(NECIA). Cambridge, MA: Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS). Full report
available at http://www.climatechoices.org/assets/documents/climatechoices/confronting-climatechange-in-the-u-s-northeast.pdf. Massachusetts Fact Sheet available at
http://www.climatechoices.org/assets/documents/climatechoices/massachuetts_necia.pdf

The Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA) describes how climate change
may affect Massachusetts and other Northeast states under two different emissions
scenarios. The lower-emissions scenario is based on atmospheric concentrations of
carbon dioxide (CO2) rising from ~380 parts per million (ppm) today to ~550 ppm
by the end of the century; the higher emissions scenarios assumes an increase to
940 ppm. The report describes the anticipated impacts of climate change on the
Northeast climate, coastal resources, marine resources, forests, agriculture, winter
recreation, and human health.

Hammar-Klose, E.S., E.A. Pendleton, E.R. Thieler, and S.J. Williams (2003).
Coastal Vulnerability Assessment of Cape Cod National Seashore (CACO) to
Sea-Level Rise. U.S. Geological Survey, Open file Report 02-233. Available at
http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2002/of02-233/images/pdf/CapeCod_CVI.pdf

This report presents the results of a vulnerability assessment for Cape Cod National
Seashore (CACO), highlighting areas that are likely to be most affected by future sea
level rise (SLR). The coastal vulnerability assessment was based on six variables:
geomorphology, shoreline change rate, coastal slope, relative sea-level change,
mean significant wave height, and mean tidal range. The coastal vulnerability index
(CVI) analysis identified four separate regions of relative coastal vulnerability within
CACO: very high vulnerability, high vulnerability, moderate vulnerability, and lowest
vulnerability. The very high vulnerability region is in the most southern portion of
CACO starting around Coast Guard Beach. Regions of high vulnerability are
distributed within the park, but the most consistent area of high vulnerability exists
within Cape Cod Bay. Moderate vulnerability shoreline is concentrated around the
Provincetown spit system. The lowest vulnerability shoreline is on the outer cape
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

6

from Head of the Meadow Beach south to Marconi Beach. The study determined that
the most influential variables in the CVI are geomorphology and regional coastal
slope. As a result, those two variables may be considered the dominant factors
controlling how CACO will evolve as sea level rises.
Kirshen, P., C. Watson, E. Douglas, A. Gontz, J. Lee, and Y. Tian (2007).
Coastal Flooding in the Northeastern United States due to Climate Change.
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 13: 437-451.
Available at http://www.northeastclimateimpacts.org/pdf/miti/kirshen_et_al.pdf
This study estimates the change in recurrence intervals of storm surges in the
northeastern United States due to possible SLR scenarios. At five sea level stations in
the United States, from Massachusetts to New Jersey, SLR trends and tidal effects
were removed from the hourly sea level time series and then a frequency analysis
was performed on the positive remaining anomalies that represent storm surge
heights. Then using eustatic SLR estimates for lower and higher greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions scenarios (SRES B1, and SRES A1fi, respectively) and assumed
trends in local SLR, new recurrence intervals were determined for future storm
surges. The historical local SLR for Woods Hole was found to be 1.0 mm/year. The
study results found that, under the lower emission scenario, the recurrence interval
of the present 100-year storm surge in Woods Hole will be less than 50 years by
2050, and 35 years or less by 2100. Under the higher emission scenario, the
recurrence interval will be 35 years by 2050 and less than every 2 years by 2100.
Suarez, P., W. Anderson, V. Mahal, and T.R. Lakshmana (2005). Impacts of
flooding and climate change on urban transportation: A system-wide
performance assessment of the Boston Metro Area. Transportation Research
Part D 10:231-244. Available at

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6VH8-4G4PC3C1&_user=10&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersio
n=0&_userid=10&md5=61aec9a88e7a386b83167997237fc729

This paper addresses the potential impact of climate change on the performance of
the surface transportation system in the Boston Metro Area, with particular focus on
transportation disruption. In order to understand the magnitude of transportation
disruption the study simulated the effects of flooding and climate change using
Boston’s Urban Transportation Modeling System (UTMS). The model was first run
under normal circumstances to provide baseline values for the volume of travel and
the amount of time spent in travel. A set of flooding scenarios was then designed to
identify: 1) areas that are flooded so that no trips begin or end there, and 2)
network links that become impassable. Flooding scenarios were developed based on
combinations of the year of the simulation, the area flooded (no flooding, 100-year,
or 500-year floodplain based on Flood Insurance Rate Maps), and type of flooding
(coastal, riverine, or both). Over the period 2000–2100, the results indicate that
delays and trips lost increase by 80 and 82 percent respectively under the climate
change scenario.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

7

Thieler, E.R., J. O’Connell, and C. Schupp (2001). Massachusetts Shoreline
Change Project: 1800s to 1994. Available at
http://www.mass.gov/czm///hazards/pdf/shorelinechangetechnicalreport.pdf. Maps and data tables
available from the Massachusetts Ocean Resource Information System
(MORIS) available at http://www.mass.gov/czm/mapping/index.htm
The goal of the Massachusetts Office of Coastal Zone Management (CZM) Shoreline
Change Project is to develop and distribute scientific data that will help inform local
land use decisions. In a previous phase of the Shoreline Change Project, CZM
completed a statistical analysis from the mid-1800s to 1978 for Massachusetts
ocean-facing coastline and produced 76 maps that demonstrate long-term shoreline
change. In 2001, CZM updated the Shoreline Change Project maps using 1994 NOAA
aerial photographs of the Massachusetts shoreline. The new maps and statistical
analysis of shoreline change now cover the time period from the mid-1800s to 1994.
The 76 1:10,000-scale shoreline change maps show the relative positions of four
to five historic shorelines and depict the long-term change rate at 40-meter
intervals along the shore.
TRANSPORTATION AND CLIMATE CHANGE (MITIGATION AND
ADAPTATION)
Bryn, P., Z. Wadud, and A. Greszler (2010). Modal Primer on Greenhouse Gas
and Energy Issues for the Transportation Industry: Road Transportation.
Transportation Research Board, Circular Number E-C143. Available at
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec143.pdf.
Road transportation is responsible for roughly three-fourths of the GHG emissions
produced by U.S. transportation systems as a result of high levels of vehicle activity
enabled by largely auto-centric planning and a lack of alternative modes. Federal
government agencies have several options for encouraging reductions in GHG
emissions from road transportation, including promoting cleaner fuel sources and
technologies that improve fuel efficiency. federal, state, and local government
agencies can all support more indirect methods of reducing GHG emissions from
road transportation by introducing pricing schemes and regulations to reduce fuel
consumption (through fewer vehicle miles travelled and/or more efficient driving)
and promoting alternative forms of transportation and coordinated land use and
transportation planning.
Cambridge Systematics, Inc (2009). Moving Cooler: An Analysis of
Transportation Strategies for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
Washington, D.C.: Urban Land Institute. Available at http://www.movingcooler.info/
This study assesses the potential effectiveness of almost 50 transportation strategies
to reduce GHG emissions by reducing the amount of vehicle travel that occurs, by
inducing people to use less fuel-intensive means of transportation, or by reducing
the amount of fuel consumed during travel through transportation system
improvements. Each strategy is assessed individually, and then combined into six
“strategy bundles” to determine the potential cumulative effects that could be
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

8

achieved. Each strategy is analyzed based on its effectiveness of reducing GHG
emissions against a baseline, which for 2010 to 2050 is 104 percent of 2005
emissions. The analysis of the different bundles found that the strategies that
contribute the most to GHG reductions are local and regional pricing and regulatory
strategies that increase the costs of single occupancy vehicle travel, regulatory
strategies that reduce and enforce speed limits, educational strategies to encourage
eco-driving behavior that achieves better fuel efficiency, land use and smart growth
strategies that reduce travel distances, and multimodal strategies that expand travel
options. The analysis also shows that some combinations of strategies could create
synergies that enhance the potential reductions of individual measures. In particular,
land use changes combined with expanded transit services achieve stronger GHG
reductions than when only one option is implemented.
ICF International (2008). Integrating Climate Change into the Transportation
Planning Process. Prepared for the Federal Highway Administration. Available
at http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/hep/climatechange/climatechange.pdf
With GHG emissions causing changes to the climate, transportation agencies
recently began to see the need to incorporate mitigation and adaptation
opportunities into their planning activities. Current discussion of climate change in
transportation plans ranges from cursory to comprehensive but more often refer to
mitigation rather than adaptation. Although agencies face no statutory barriers to
incorporating climate change into their long range transportation plans, small
agencies in particular could benefit from involvement and guidance from federal
agencies on climate change issues and see accurate and regional emissions
inventories as another significant need. One of the most promising strategies for
reducing transportation GHG emissions through transportation planning is integrated
transportation and land use planning, though it presents some limitations.
Metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) and state departments of transportation
(DOTs) do not generally have enough authority to implement such a strategy
independently, but can engage other agency partners to draft a climate action plan
that targets reduced GHG emissions. Adaptation to climate change lags among MPOs
and DOTs, largely because they lack requisite information about the nature, scale,
and timeframe of anticipated climate change impacts. This trend will likely change as
additional studies generate more precise estimates of climate change impacts.
Savonis, M.J., V.R. Burkett, and J.R. Potter (2008). Impacts of Climate Change
and Variability on Transportation Systems and Infrastructure: Gulf Coast
Study, Phase I. Synthesis and Assessment Product 4.7 of the U.S. Climate
Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research.
Available at: http://www.climatescience.gov/Library/sap/sap4-7/final-report/sap4-7-final-all.pdf
This research effort, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT),
the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), and the U.S. Climate Change Science Program
(CCSP) examines the anticipated impacts of climate change on the transportation
systems that stretch from Houston, TX, to Mobile, AL. The anticipated effects of
climate change for this region are similar to those predicted nationally, and include
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

9

elevating temperatures, rising sea level, and increases in storm frequency and
intensity (although the direction of change for overall rainfall levels is unclear). The
primary applied impacts of these effects on transportation include degradation of
materials under higher temperatures, disruption of service due to flooding events,
and damage to infrastructure from SLR-related inundation and storm surges. The
authors suggest that, although state and local transportation engineers will have to
assess and address these impacts on a facility-specific basis, broader efforts now can
help minimize the impacts of climate change on transportation systems. In
particular, long range transportation planning should consider a timeframe
commensurate with the expected useful life of infrastructure, which is generally
longer than the 20 to 30 year windows commonly used by transportation agencies.
Planning efforts should also integrate climate change into meeting the existing
challenges of safety, congestion, and environmental stewardship. In order to do this,
transportation agencies will need to work collaboratively with the scientific
community to develop higher-resolution climate change models that are accurate on
regional and sub-regional levels.
Transportation Research Board (2008). Potential Impacts of Climate Change
on U.S. Transportation. Transportation Research Board Special, Committee on
Climate Change and U.S. Transportation, Report 290. Available at

http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/sr/sr290.pdf

This Transportation Research Board Special Report summarizes the scientific
consensus on climate change effects, their anticipated impacts on U.S.
transportation systems, and recommended adaptation strategies for transportation
agencies. The effects of climate change have already begun and will continue to
escalate over the next several decades as a result of GHG emissions that have
already been released into the atmosphere. The report estimates that the most
relevant impacts of climate change for U.S transportation will be rising peak and
mean temperatures (5.4°F to 9.0°F by 2099), rising sea levels (7.1 to 23.2 inches by
2099, not including uplift along the New England Coast), and increased intensity and
frequency of precipitation. Although coastal transportation systems are most at risk
to these impacts, transportation infrastructure in both coastal and inland areas may
be susceptible to damage from more dramatic heat extremes and weather events.
As a result, the authors recommend that transportation agencies inventory critical
infrastructure in light of projected climate change impacts and incorporate such
impacts into long-term design, maintenance, operations, and emergency plans.
Members from the transportation and scientific communities should also collaborate
to generate the climate data needed for transportation planning, which could be
incorporated into decision support tools like scenario planning.
U.S. Department of Transportation (2010). Transportation’s Role in Reducing
U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions: Volume 1 Synthesis Report, Report to
Congress. Available at http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/32000/32700/32779/DOT_Climate_Change_Report__April_2010_-_Volume_1_and_2.pdf

The in-use GHG emissions from transportation (which does not include
transportation lifecycle processes like fuel or vehicle production) represents 29
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

10

percent of the U.S.’s total GHG emissions, though transportation accounts for about
one half of the U.S.’s increase in GHG emissions since 1990. This report identifies
several strategies for U.S. transportation to reduce its contribution to global GHG
emissions that can be implemented at different levels of government. While federal
and state agencies can promote the use of low-carbon fuels and more efficient
vehicles, agencies at all levels to work to improve overall system efficiency and
encourage cleaner forms of travel. These strategies (and their associated GHG
reduction factors) include lower speed limits (two percent), pricing strategies like
increased fuel taxes or pay-as-you-drive insurance (three percent), land use changes
increased availability of alternate travel modes (two to five percent by 2030; three to
ten percent by 2050), and education efforts to encourage more efficient driving
habits (one to four percent). Transportation and planning agencies can also promote
more integrated planning strategies that support compact, mixed-use development
with greater modal choice in order to reduce trip distance and frequency and
increase transportation efficiency. Transportation planning, in particular, provides
many opportunities for the federal government to help state and local governments
address their transportation system’s role in climate change.

MASSACHUSETTS STATE CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY
Eastern Research Groups, Inc (2010). Cost-Effective Greenhouse Gas
Mitigation in Massachusetts: An Analysis of 2020 Potential. Available at
http://www.mass.gov/dep/air/climate/erg2020.pdf.
Federal and state policies enacted and planned since 2007 put Massachusetts on the
path to achieve a 19 percent reduction in emissions by 2020. This report looks at the
potential for further cost-effective GHG emissions reductions beyond the state’s
existing GHG reduction policies. To identify potential reductions, the study analyzed
readily quantifiable measures that could be taken at low or zero cost, or at a net
savings to the state, for the major emitting sectors – transportation, electricity,
residential and commercial buildings, industry, and solid waste. For the
transportation sector, three sources of potential emissions reductions were analyzed:
1) reducing the growth rate of vehicle miles traveled (VMT), 2) improving vehicle
fuel efficiency, and 3) changes in driving behavior to improve miles per gallon. The
study concluded that the total cost‐effective potential for reductions in transportation
sector emissions in 2020 associated with reduced VMT growth, improved fuel
efficiency, and improved driving practices is 4.6 MMtCO2e (million metric tons of CO2
equivalent) of avoided GHG emissions.
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (2009). Statewide
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Level: 1990 Baseline and 2020 Business as Usual
Projection. Available at http://www.mass.gov/dep/air/climate/1990_2020_final.pdf
The Massachusetts Global Warming Solutions Act, signed into law in August 2008,
established the Climate Protection and Green Economy Act in Massachusetts General
Law. This law requires the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) to determine the statewide greenhouse gas emissions level in 1990 and
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

11

reasonably project GHG emissions for 2020 under a business as usual scenario. The
state’s economy-wide GHG emissions in 1990 were 94 MMTCO2e. The sources of
GHG emissions used to determine the 1990 baseline are: combustion of fossil fuels
(89.8 MMTCO2e), industrial processes (0.7 MMTCO2e), agriculture (0.4 MMTCO2e),
and waste management (3.6 MMTCO2e). Modeling results show that in a business as
usual scenario, without any new climate related policies since 2007, emissions would
remain relatively steady from the present through 2020 (i.e. 94 MMTCO2e). The DEP
used the US Environmental Protection Agency’s State GHG Inventory Tool to
estimate emissions for both the 1990 baseline and the 2020 projection.
CAPE COD REGIONAL PLANS
Cape Cod Commission (2010). Draft 2010 Barnstable County Cape Cod,
Massachusetts Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan. Available at

http://www.capecodcommission.org/planning/RegionalMHMplan_update2010.pdf

The Barnstable County Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan was created with the 15 local
governments of Cape Cod and in consultation with the Regional Multi-Hazard
Community Planning Team (MHCPT) in order to identify hazards that affect the
region and strategies for mitigating those hazards. The plan includes the impacts of
climate change in its definition of hazard, including SLR and increased intensity and
frequency of storms and precipitation. In fact, the plan identifies flooding and
shoreline change, both of which are likely to be exacerbated by the future effects of
climate change, as the two most serious hazards to threaten Cape Cod. Heavy
precipitation events and storm surges will increase in frequency and intensity,
threatening to incapacitate transportation infrastructure, drinking water supplies, and
wastewater facilities. Route 6A, a main evacuation route on Cape Cod, crosses many
tidal creeks and marshes, which could isolate the communities that it serves during
SLR, storm surge, or heavy precipitation-induced flooding. A potential benefit of
future climate change impacts is a reduced likelihood of drought due to a projected
five to eight percent increase in precipitation by 2050. This increase in precipitation
will also reduce the threat of wildfires on Cape Cod. A secondary impact of
increasing temperatures could benefit Cape Cod’s economy but also threaten to
overwhelm its infrastructure. An increase in the number of very hot days could boost
the regions summer vacation population, which would introduce additional strain on
transportation and water systems. In order to meet several objectives of the plan
that relate to climate change, the Regional MHCPT recommends that agencies
develop and adopt regional and local climate adaptation plans.
Cape Cod Commission (2009). Cape Cod Regional Policy Plan. Available at

http://www.capecodcommission.org/RPP/RPP-Effective01-16-09.pdf

The Cape Cod Regional Policy Plan (RPP) is a planning and regulatory document for
Barnstable County that identifies a growth policy for Barnstable County. The RPP’s
stated growth policy is to guide growth toward areas that are adequately supported
by infrastructure and away from areas that must be protected for ecological,
historical, or other reasons. The RPP identifies 32 goals in the areas of growth
management, natural system and human/built systems. For each goal, the RPP
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

12

recommends actions for the Commission and Cape towns to take, establishes
minimum performance standards, and identifies best development practices to
achieve the stated goal. The RPP also identifies key resources of regional
importance, and contains GIS maps of those resources. Available maps include:
regional land use vision, infrastructure and economic development, water resources,
open space, significant natural resource areas, waste management facilities,
wetlands and buffers, and more.
Cape Cod Commission (2007 and 2010). Regional Transportation Plan.
Available at http://www.gocapecod.org/rtp/
The Cape Cod Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) contains overview information as
well as projects, programs, and studies for Cape Cod’s transportation system
extending from the years 2007 through 2030 30. Cape Cod contains 2,589.73 miles of
roads, of which 65.1 percent are owned by local towns and 7.8 percent are owned
by Massachusetts DOT Highway. The remaining roads are owned in small
percentages by the county, other state and federal agencies, and private entities.
The RTP identifies congestion as the region’s largest current and future problem,
though it also sets safety and security, multimodal accessibility, system
maintenance, environmental protection, community orientation, equitability, and
cooperation among stakeholders as its goals. Congestion is particularly a problem
during the summer, when the proportion of non-Cape Cod registered vehicles along
Route 6 nearly doubles. Among the possible strategies for achieving the goals
established in the RTP are transit-oriented development, congestion pricing on major
routes, deployment of alternative modes of transportation, and transportation
planning that emphasizes local development.
SCENARIO PLANNING
Bartholomew, K. (2005). Integrating Land Use Issues into Transportation
Planning: Scenario Planning. University of Utah, prepared for Federal
Highway Administration. Available at
http://faculty.arch.utah.edu/bartholomew/SP_SummaryRpt_Web.pdf

Scenario planning processes have recently been employed by a number of U.S.
cities, towns, and MPOs to evaluate quantitative impacts of possible development
outcomes. Scenario planning evolved out of military and business applications,
where it was used to evaluate relationships between external influences and assess
a range of options. Traditional transportation planning, on the other hand, largely
ignores the interaction between land use patterns and transportation systems. MPOs
and local governments most commonly conduct scenario planning exercises, often
with the intent of avoiding sprawl and its associated consequences. Given the
involvement of MPOs, scenario planning efforts commonly result in a transportation
or development plan or policy, though some initiatives do not result in any action.

30

Chapter 1 is a draft from the 2010 Regional Transportation Plan, whose timeframe extends from 2011 through 2035.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

13

Based on a review of existing literature and scenario planning studies, Bartholomew
recommends developing four scenarios in order to avoid the perception that two
scenarios represent good and bad, three scenarios represent a high/medium/low
ranking, or the overwhelming nature of five or more scenarios. Scenario titles should
also not convey a positive or negative bias; Bartholomew cites “Urban Sprawl”,
“Business as Usual”, “Wise Growth”, and “Quality of Life” as names that express an
agency’s preference.
Bartholomew, K., and R. Ewing (2007). Land Use-Transportation Scenario
Planning in an Era of Global Climate Change. University of Utah and
University of Maryland. Available at
http://faculty.arch.utah.edu/bartholomew/Bartholomew_Ewing_Revision.pdf

Transportation is one of the leading and fastest-growing contributors to GHG
emissions in the country, in no small part due to historical land use patterns. Urban
sprawl has increased VMT while reducing the acreage of forest that can capture CO2
emissions. Compact land development can potentially curb these trends, the benefits
of which can be quantified through a scenario planning process that compares a
status quo development future to a range of feasible alternatives. An analysis of 23
scenario planning efforts revealed a median VMT reduction of 5.7 percent, at least in
part due to a median increase in density of 13.8 percent. Despite these somewhat
modest projections, ranges of +5.2 to -31.7 percent change in VMT and -14.8 to
+64.3 percent change in density indicate the wide array of possible development
alternatives that scenario planning can present. Despite the effectiveness of scenario
planning in projecting volume changes as a result of land use changes, the scenario
planning efforts surveyed for this report generally lacked accurate analyses of the
CO2 emissions reductions that could be expected to accompany those changes. The
authors suggest that regional scenario planning efforts should integrate all factors
that have the potential to influence travel patterns.
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
Ashton, A.D., J.P. Donnelly, and R.L. Evans. A Discussion of the Potential
Impacts of Climate Change on the Shorelines of the Northeastern USA.
Prepared for the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment, Union of
Concerned Scientists by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
Available at http://www.northeastclimateimpacts.org/pdf/tech/ashton_et_al.pdf.
Brekke, L.D. et al. (2009). Climate Change and Water Resources
Management: A Federal Perspective. U.S. Geological Survey. Circular 1331.
Available at http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1331/Circ1331.pdf.
Cambridge Systematics, Inc. (2009). Transportation Adaptation to Global
Climate Change. Washington, D.C.: Bipartisan Policy Center. Available at
http://www.bipartisanpolicy.org/sites/default/files/Transportation%20Adaptation%20(3).pdf.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

14

Cape Cod Commission (2007). Cape Cod Emergency Preparedness Handbook.
Available at
http://www.capecodcommission.org/emergencyprephandbook/EmergencyHandbook1007a.pdf.
Cape Cod Commission (2009). Cape Cod Traffic Counting Report 2009.
Available at http://www.gocapecod.org/counts/pdf_count/TCR2009.pdf.
Clarke, L.E. et al. (2007). Scenarios of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and
Atmospheric Concentration. U.S. Climate Change Science Program
Synthesis and Assessment Product 2.1a. Available at
http://www.climatescience.gov/Library/sap/sap2-1/finalreport/sap2-1a-final-all.pdf.
Climate Change Work Group (2008). The Role of Coastal Zone Management
Programs in Adaptation to Climate Change. Coastal States Organization.
Available at
http://www.coastalstates.org/uploads/PDFs/CSO%202008%20Climate%20Change%20Report.pdf.
Coastal Hazards Commission (2007). Preparing for the Storm:
Recommendations for Management of Risk from Coastal Hazards in
Massachusetts. Massachusetts Office of Coastal Zone Management.
Available at http://www.mass.gov/czm/chc/recommendations/chc_final_report_2007.pdf.
Coastal Services Center (2009). Hazard Exposure Information for Barnstable
County, MA. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Available
at http://csc-s-maps-q.csc.noaa.gov/CountySnapshots/reports/CountySnapshot_25001.pdf.
Committee for Study on Transportation Research Programs to Address Energy
and Climate Change (2009). A Transportation Research Program for
Mitigating and Adapting to Climate Change and Conserving Energy.
Transportation Research Board Special Report 299. Available at
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/sr/sr299.pdf.
Commonwealth of Massachusetts (2010). Draft Climate Implementation Plan:
A framework for meeting the 2020 and 2050 goals of the Global Warming
Solutions Act. Massachusetts Executive Office of Energy and
Environmental Affairs. Available at http://www.mass.gov/dep/air/climate/draftcip.pdf.
Cox, J. et al. (2006). Social Vulnerability to Climate Change: A Neighborhood
Analysis of the Northeast U.S. Megaregion. Union of Concerned Scientists
Northeast Climate Change Impact Study. Available at
http://www.northeastclimateimpacts.org/pdf/tech/cox_et_al.pdf.
Dempsety, R., and A. Fisher (2005). Information Tools for Community
Adaptation to Changes in Climate or Land Use. Consortium for Atlantic
Regional Assessment.
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

15

Environment Northeast (2006). Climate Change Roadmap for New England
and Eastern Canada: Chapter 2, Transportation: 132-196. Available at
http://www.env-ne.org/public/resources/pdf/Roadmap_Transportation_Chapter.pdf.
Environmental Protection Agency (2010). Climate Change Indicators in the
United States. Available at http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/indicators.html.
Fogarty, M. et al. (2007). Potential Climate Change Impacts on Marine
Resources of the Northeastern United States. Northeast Climate Impacts
Assessment. Available at
http://www.capecodcommission.org/bylaws/Coastal_Floodplain_Bylaw_Dec2009.pdf.
Frederick, K. (1997). Water Resources and Climate Change. Climate Issues
Brief No. 3. Available at http://www.rff.org/rff/documents/rff-ccib-03.pdf.
Grant, M. et al. (2010). Assessing Mechanisms for Integrating TransportationRelated Greenhouse Gas Reduction Objectives into Transportation
Decision Making. NCHRP Web-Only Document 152. Available at
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/nchrp_w152.pdf.
Gutierrez, B.T., J.S. Williams, and R.E. Theiler (2009). Basic Approaches for
Shoreline Change Projections. Coastal Sensitivity to Sea-Level Rise: A
Focus on the Mid-Atlantic Region: 239-242. Available at
http://climatescience.gov/Library/sap/sap4-1/final-report/sap4-1-final-report-Appendix2.pdf.
Haas, P. et al. (2010). Transit Oriented Development and The Potential for
VMT-related Greenhouse Gas Emissions Growth Reduction. Prepared by
the Center for Neighborhood Technology for the Center for Transit
Oriented Development. Available at http://www.cnt.org/repository/TOD-Potential-GHGEmissions-Growth.FINAL.pdf.
Hayhoe, K. et al. (2006). Past and future changes in climate and hydrological
indicators in the U.S. Northeast. Available at
http://www.northeastclimateimpacts.org/pdf/tech/hayhoe_et_al_climate_dynamics_2006.pdf.
Hayhoe, K., et al. (2007). Regional Climate Change Projects for the Northeast
U.S. M itigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change , June 2008:
425-436. Available at http://www.northeastclimateimpacts.org/pdf/miti/hayhoe_et_al.pdf.
Kirshen, P. et al. (2004). Infrastructure Systems, Services and Climate
Change: Integrated Impacts and Response Strategies for the Boston
Metropolitan Area. Tufts University, University of Maryland, Boston
University, and Metropolitan Area Planning Council. Available at

http://www.pewtrusts.org/uploadedFiles/wwwpewtrustsorg/Reports/Global_warming/040813Climate_C
hange_Boston.pdf.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

16

Lowe, J. A. and J. M. Gregory (2010). A sea of uncertainty: How well can we
predict future sea level rise? Nature Reports Clim ate Change , April 2010:
42-43. Available at http://www.nature.com/climate/2010/1004/full/climate.2010.29.html.
Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency (2009). Cape Cod Emergency
Traffic Plan. Available at

http://www.mass.gov/?pageID=eopsterminal&L=3&L0=Home&L1=Public+Safety+Agencies&L2=Massa
chusetts+Emergency+Management+Agency&sid=Eeops&b=terminalcontent&f=mema_hurricane_cape
_cod_emergency_traffic_plan&csid=Eeops.

Masterson, J.P. (2004). Simulated Interaction Between Freshwater and
Saltwater and Effects of Ground-Water Pumping and Sea-Level Change,
Lower Cape Cod Aquifer System, Massachusetts. U.S. Geological Survey.
Scientific Investigations Report 2004-5014. Available at
http://pubs.usgs.gov/sir/2004/5014/pdf/sir200405014.pdf.
Meyer, M.D. (2008). Design Standards for U.S. Transportation Infrastructure:
The Implications of Climate Change. Georgia Institute of Technology.
Available at http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/32000/32100/32150/sr290Meyer.pdf.
Moomaw, W. and L. Johnston (2007). Emissions Mitigation Opportunities and
Practice in Northeastern United States. M itigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change , June 2008: 615-642. Available at
http://www.northeastclimateimpacts.org/pdf/miti/moomaw_and_johnston.pdf.
Nakićenović, N. et al. (2000). IPCC Special Report, Emissions Scenarios:
Summary for Policymakers. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Available at http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/spm/sres-en.pdf.
New England Regional Assessment (2002). U.S. Global Change Research
Program. Available at http://www.necci.sr.unh.edu/2001-NERA-Foundation-Doc.html.
O’Connell, J.F. and S. Justus (2009). Model Bylaw For Effectively Managing
Coastal Floodplain Development. Woods Hole Sea Grant, University of
Hawaii Sea Grant, and the Cape Cod Commission. Available at
http://www.capecodcommission.org/bylaws/Coastal_Floodplain_Bylaw_Dec2009.pdf.
Rahmstorf, S. (2010). A new view on sea level rise. Nature R eports Clim ate
Change , April 2010: 44-45. Available at
http://www.nature.com/climate/2010/1004/full/climate.2010.29.html.
Ramsey, J. et al. (2005). South Shore Coastal Hazards Characterization Atlas
Description of Variables. Prepared for Massachusetts Office of Coastal
Zone Management by Applied Coastal Research and Engineering, Inc.
Available at http://www.mass.gov/czm/hazards/ss_atlas/pdf/ss_atlas_variables_report.pdf.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

17

Suarez, P. et al. (2005). Impacts of flooding and climate change on urban
transportation: A systemwide performance assessment of the Boston
Metro Area. Transportation R esearch Part D: Transport and Environm ent ,
May 2005: 231-244. Available at

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6VH8-4G4PC3C1&_user=10&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlV
ersion=0&_userid=10&md5=61aec9a88e7a386b83167997237fc729.

Theiler, R. et al. (2003). The Future of Falmouth’s South Shore. Report of the
Coastal Resources Working Group to the Board of Selectmen, Falmouth,
MA. Available at http://www.falmouthmass.us/coastal/crwg_falmouth_report.pdf.
U.S. Climate Change Science Program (2008). Human Health and Welfare in a
Changing Climate: Summary and Findings of the U.S. Climate Change
Science Program. Available at http://www.climatescience.gov/Library/sap/sap4-6/finalreport/sap4-6-brochure-FAQ.pdf.
United States Global Change Research Program (2009). Regional Climate
Impacts: Northeast. 107-110. Available at
http://www.globalchange.gov/images/cir/pdf/northeast.pdf.
Venner, M and Santalucia, A. (2010). Environmental Corridor Management.
NCHRP 25-25/63. Available at http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/docs/NCHRP2525%2863%29_FR.pdf

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

18

Appendix C: Request for Proposal
STATEMENT OF WORK
SCENARIO PLANNING FOR THE INTERAGENCY CLIMATE CHANGE
SCENARIO PLANNING PILOT PROJECT
AUGUST 9, 2010
1. PURPOSE
The Volpe National Transportation Systems Center (Volpe Center) is a Federal fee-forservice organization within the Research and Innovative Technology Administration
(RITA) of the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT). The Volpe Center’s mission is
to improve the safety, security, and efficiency of the nation’s transportation systems
while minimizing its environmental impact.
Proposed by members of the Interagency Working Group on Transportation, Land Use,
and Climate Change, the Interagency Climate Change Scenario Planning Pilot Project is
an initiative designed to bring together multiple federal agencies and local, regional, and
state stakeholders to work towards a shared and practical future transportation and land
use development strategy. The strategy will consider potential transportation and land-use
impacts of climate change, specifically sea level rise (SLR), while integrating measures
aimed at reducing the region’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. A scenario planning
process will be used to develop the most desirable transportation and land use
development strategy.
The Volpe Center seeks a contractor to provide a transportation- and land use-focused
scenario planning software tool and technical scenario planning expertise in support of
the Interagency Climate Change Scenario Planning Pilot Project. The contractor will
support specific aspects of this project as outlined in the “Description of Services”
section below.

2. BACKGROUND
The goals of the Interagency Climate Change Scenario Planning Pilot Project are to
reduce future GHG emissions from the transportation sector and to estimate the impacts
of climate change on land use and transportation infrastructure. As a result of the scenario
planning process, the project’s outcome will be a transportation- and land use-focused
development strategy that anticipates certain estimated climate change impacts and has
the goal to reduce future GHG emissions. These results can be integrated into the
region’s long-range transportation and local, state, and federal agency plans.
Federal agencies involved with the Interagency Climate Change Scenario Planning Pilot
Project include the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), the National Park Service
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

19

(NPS), the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS),
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the
Department of Defense. Several state, regional, and local agencies are also involved with
this pilot project.
Study Area
The study area for this project is defined as Cape Cod, Massachusetts. This region, which
comprises Barnstable County, includes 15 towns. The Interagency Working Group
selected Cape Cod as the location for this pilot project due to the presence of a number of
gateway communities; its existing partnerships; presence of – and special area of concern
for – several federal agencies; myriad yet geographically-bounded transportation, land
use, and economic development issues; a high degree of recreational travel; coastal
location; vulnerability to certain projected climate change effects, such as SLR; and its
communities’ interests in sustainability.
Interagency Support
Planning Group
A planning group, composed of representatives from the federal agencies listed above
and the Cape Cod Commission, sets the direction and oversees the progress of the pilot
project. This group has a conference call at least once every three weeks. Specific
roles/responsibilities of the planning group (from the charter) include:
• Provides general guidance and oversight of the pilot project
• Invites participation in the Technical Committee
• Incorporates Technical Committee input into decision-making
• Guides the development of interim products and results
• Reviews deliverables and interim products
• Provides input into the crafting of development scenarios for Cape Cod
o Attend workshops
o Review and inform results
• Communicates results and interim findings to federal agencies and other
stakeholders
• Helps integrate results into constituent agencies’ long- and short-range plans
• Provides feedback on pilot project process and areas for improvement/lessons
learned
Technical Committee
A technical committee, composed of representatives from several federal, state, regional,
and local agencies as well as a number of non-profit organizations, convenes conference
calls on an as-needed basis. This committee provides technical input into the project,
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

20

including geographic information systems (GIS) data and SLR and storm surge estimates.
Specific roles/responsibilities of the technical committee (from the charter) include:
• Provides guidance to Planning Group regarding all technical issues
• Identifies resources appropriate for literature review
• Assists in data collection (primarily via GIS) and provides information on 1) ways
to integrate GHG emission mitigation measures into scenarios and 2) climate
change effects and impacts
• Provides input into the desired targets, or end goals, for scenarios with regard to
climate change emissions and other outcomes
• Provides input into the crafting of development scenarios for Cape Cod
o Inform greenhouse gas emission estimates
o Attend workshops
o Review and inform results
• Communicates results and interim findings to state, regional, and local agencies
and other stakeholders
• Helps integrate results into constituent agencies’ long- and short-range plans
The Volpe Center
The Volpe Center provides staff for this project and performs the work described in the
Interagency Climate Change Scenario Planning Pilot Project Scope of Work.
Work and Accomplishments to Date/Government Furnished Information
The following documents will be provided as government furnished information at the
time of award as context and additional background materials for the project.
Interagency Scope of Work and Timeline
The Interagency Climate Change Scenario Planning Pilot Project Scope of Work
describes all components of the work to be conducted as part of the Interagency Climate
Change Scenario Planning Pilot Project. This Interagency Scope of Work was finalized in
May 2010; the project has evolved and specified the component parts in more detail. The
components of the Interagency Scope of Work include:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Coordinating stakeholders and documenting the project
Conducting a document and analysis review
Developing/identifying a GIS-based database
Developing scenarios
Evaluating the scenarios
Creating an implementation plan

Planning Group Charter, Roster, and Meeting Summaries
The planning group charter describes the roles and responsibilities of the planning group
and how it interfaces with the technical committee. The roster lists contact information
for the over 20 representatives from the eight federal agencies involved in the project.
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

21

There are brief summaries for each of the tri-weekly teleconferences that have been held
since the middle of February 2010.
Technical Committee Charter, Roster, and Meeting Summaries
The technical committee charter describes the roles and responsibilities of the technical
committee and how it interfaces with the planning group. The roster lists contact
information for the over 30 representatives from the 12 state, regional, and local agencies
and non-profit organizations involved in the project. There are brief summaries for each
of the teleconferences that have been held as needed since the middle of May 2010.
Literature/Data Review
The annotated literature/data review summarizes studies, reports, and data sources that
are available to project participants; where available, links to these resources are
provided. The purpose of this review is to ensure that the project builds on existing
resources and does not duplicate work that has already been conducted.
Estimated SLR Map
The planning group and technical committee determined that SLR impact estimates for
the region should not be based on a simple inundation assumption for SLR because
different parts of Cape Cod will be impacted by SLR in different ways. Accordingly,
members of the technical committee and other coastal scientists participated in an expert
elicitation to develop a GIS-based SLR vulnerability map of the region. The map was
developed based on an expert assessment of likely coastal changes, using recent
orthophotography, landform and geologic maps, and elevation data.
GIS Data and Transportation Model Outputs
The Volpe Center will provide the contractor with available GIS land use data and
transportation model outputs for the region.
Transportation Measures and Priorities for GHG Mitigation
Members of the planning group and technical committee explored and identified relevant
transportation measures and priorities specific to Cape Cod and to Massachusetts that will
result in GHG emission reductions from the transportation sector. The group also
identified likely national technology measures and priorities that will likely trickle down
to the Cape. A list of these measures and priorities will be made available to participants
in the scenario planning workshops.
Measures and priorities considered include but are not limited to different mixes of:
• Conventional internal combustion engine technology, gas-electric hybrids, and
flexible fuel vehicles;
• Low-carbon fuels, clean diesels, and clean diesels running on various biodiesel
blends;
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

22

•

Plug-in hybrids and all-electric vehicles running on various electricity supply
mixes (ISO-New England electricity mix, renewable generation, etc.);
• Roadway hardware changes (lighting, highly retroreflective material, etc.);
• Solar panels and wind generation in highway rights of way;
• Operational improvements; and
• Pricing strategies.
The penetration of these measures will be determined by scenario planning workshop
participants. Implementation opportunities include but are not limited to constructing
charging stations, plug-in hybrid or all-electric rental/share fleets centered at transport
terminals, and biofuel-centered fueling stations and fleets.
Reducing vehicle miles traveled is another measure available to reduce GHG emissions.
Opportunities to reduce vehicle miles traveled include but are not limited to increased
transit, the re-institution of passenger rail, increased ferry service, and the construction of
bike paths and lanes. While the group identified relevant options, the penetration of these
measures will be determined by scenario planning workshop participants.

3. DESCRIPTION OF SERVICES
Task 1: Provide Overview and Performance Indicators for Scenario Planning
Process
Task 1.1 Distribute a list of the universe of potential scenario performance indicators that
the scenario planning software tool is able to evaluate to the planning group and technical
committee. The scenario planning software tool shall have the ability to reflect/account
for at least five key indicators: GHG emissions, transport energy use, congestion and
vehicle miles traveled, cost to implement the scenario, and the preservation of
natural/existing ecosystems.
Deliverable:
• Listing, in Microsoft Word, of the universe of potential performance
indicators, including GHG emissions, transport energy use, congestion, cost to
implement the scenario, and the preservation of natural/existing ecosystems,
submitted to the Volpe Center Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative
(COTR)/Project Lead for distribution to the planning group and technical
committee
Task 1.2 Present an overview of the scenario planning software tool and the scenario
planning methodology to be performed to members of the planning group and technical
committee. This presentation shall be in Microsoft PowerPoint format, be presented as a
webconference, and occur during the teleconference about performance indicators (as
described in Task 1.3). The Microsoft PowerPoint slides shall be provided to the Volpe
Center COTR at least two days before the webconference for distribution to members of
the planning group and technical committee. The Volpe Center will provide access to a
webconference platform.
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

23

Deliverables:
• Microsoft PowerPoint presentation of the scenario planning software tool
submitted to the Volpe Center COTR
• Microsoft PowerPoint slides presented via webconference to members of the
planning group and technical committee
Task 1.3 Participate in a teleconference with members of the planning group and
technical committee as they select and prioritize performance indicators. The contractor
will respond to questions and take notes on the agreed upon prioritization of performance
indicators.
Deliverables:
• Teleconference participation
• Prioritized listing, in Microsoft Word, of performance indicators submitted to
the Volpe Center COTR for distribution to the planning group and technical
committee
Task 2: Develop Baseline and Preliminary Scenarios
Task 2.1 Determine and establish a baseline of existing land use, demographics, and
existing transportation infrastructure and services on Cape Cod. The baseline shall be
developed in GIS and reflect summer conditions on Cape Cod when tourism is at its
peak. At a minimum, the baseline shall contain information on current vehicle trips by
mode, vehicle miles traveled, zoning, and GHG emissions.
Deliverables:
• Baseline GIS data layers containing information on zoning and transportation
infrastructure submitted to the Volpe Center COTR
• Draft output report in Microsoft Word summarizing baseline regional data for
key performance indicators, including vehicle trips by mode, vehicle miles
traveled, and GHG emissions submitted to the Volpe Center COTR 3 business
days before due date; the Volpe Center COTR will provide
comments/suggested revisions 2 business days before due date
• Final output report in Microsoft Word
Task 2.2 Develop a status quo/trends-continued scenario using the scenario planning
software tool. This scenario shall reflect current Cape Cod trends in transportation and
land use being projected out 20 years. The contractor shall complete the development of
this scenario, evaluate and describe this scenario in terms of the prioritized performance
indicators, and provide the Volpe Center with a report that summarizes all assumptions
and any issues at least one week prior to Workshop I.
Deliverables:
• Status quo/trends continued scenario created using contractor’s scenario
planning software tool; resulting map(s) in ArcGIS submitted to Volpe Center
COTR
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

24

•

•

Draft output report in Microsoft Word describing the status quo/trends
continued scenario in terms of the key performance indicators, maps, and all
assumptions and issues involved in developing this scenario submitted to the
Volpe Center COTR 3 business days before due date; the Volpe Center COTR
will provide comments/suggested revisions 2 business days before due date
Final output report in Microsoft Word

Task 2.3 Develop a current plans extended 20 years scenario using the scenario planning
software tool. This scenario shall reflect the Cape Cod Commission’s Regional Land Use
Vision Map (http://www.capecodcommission.org/RPP/capevision_rpp09_final.pdf)
and transportation and land use policies described in the Commission’s Regional Policy
Plan (http://www.capecodcommission.org/RPP/). The contractor shall complete the
development of this scenario, evaluate and describe this scenario in terms of the
prioritized performance indicators, and provide the Volpe Center with a report that
summarizes all assumptions and any issues at least one week prior to Workshop I.
Deliverables:
• Current plans extended continued scenario created using contractor’s scenario
planning software tool; resulting map(s) in ArcGIS submitted to Volpe Center
COTR
• Draft output report in Microsoft Word describing the current plans extended
scenario in terms of the key performance indicators, maps, and all
assumptions and issues involved in developing this scenario submitted to the
Volpe Center COTR 3 business days before due date; the Volpe Center COTR
will provide comments/suggested revisions 2 business days before due date
• Final output report in Microsoft Word
Task 2.4 Develop two “extreme” scenarios: dispersed/even development and
intense/focused development. Both of these scenarios should be developed using the
scenario planning software tool and extend 20 years. The purpose of developing these
scenarios is to show workshop participants how these extreme scenarios compare with
respect to the prioritized performance indicators and the status quo and plans extended
scenarios. The contractor shall complete the development of these scenarios, evaluate and
describe these scenarios in terms of the prioritized performance indicators, and provide
the Volpe Center with a report that summarizes all assumptions and any issues at least
one week prior to Workshop I.
Deliverables:
• Two extreme development scenarios created using contractor’s scenario
planning software tool; resulting map(s) in ArcGIS submitted to Volpe Center
COTR
• Draft output report in Microsoft Word describing the extreme scenarios in
terms of the key performance indicators, maps, and all assumptions and issues
involved in developing these scenarios submitted to the Volpe Center COTR 3
business days before due date; the Volpe Center COTR will provide
comments/suggested revisions 2 business days before due date
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

25

•

Final output report in Microsoft Word

Task 2.5 Integrate the technical committee’s GIS-based SLR vulnerability map into the
scenario planning software tool.
Deliverable:
• Integrated SLR vulnerability map into the contractor’s scenario planning
software tool; resulting map(s) in ArcGIS submitted to Volpe Center COTR
Task 3: Prepare for Scenario Planning Workshops
Task 3.1 Provide assistance in designing two consecutive scenario planning workshops –
Workshop I (half day) and Workshop II (full day) – on Cape Cod. While the Volpe
Center will lead the development of the agendas, the contractor shall work with the Volpe
Center to design the agendas for these workshops. Members of the planning group and
technical committee will also provide input on the agendas.
Deliverable:
• Participation in formulating the agendas via teleconferences with the Volpe
Center project team
Task 3.2 Travel to Cape Cod to participate in the scenario planning workshops. The
contractor shall plan on a two- or three-night trip to Cape Cod to participate in Workshop
I and Workshop II and include the travel cost in the budget. The workshops will be held
in a conference room setting.
Deliverable:
• Travel to and participation in two consecutive scenario planning workshops
Task 4: Participate in Scenario Planning Workshop I
The contractor shall present information at the first scenario planning workshop, which
will be a half-day in duration. All planning group and technical committee members will
be invited to attend the workshop, but local stakeholders (i.e., representatives from the 15
towns, the county, the MPO, the National Seashore, the transit agency, etc.) will be the
primary audience. An estimated 40 to 60 people will physically be in attendance. The
Volpe Center will ensure speakerphone and webconference access are available for
participants in remote locations and that a projector is available for the contractor to plugin a laptop when presenting information to the attendees. The Volpe Center will facilitate
the workshop. The contractor shall perform the following key tasks for this workshop.
Task 4.1 The contractor shall present a brief overview of how the scenario planning
software tool works and what land use and transportation typologies (zoning, levels of
vehicle miles traveled, etc.) will be used.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

26

Deliverable:
• Overview presentation using Microsoft PowerPoint and/or their scenario
planning software tool and verbal description of land use and transportation
typologies presented to workshop attendees
Task 4.2 The contractor shall present the status quo/trends continued scenario, the
current plans extended scenario, and the extreme scenarios as examples of how the
scenario planning software tool works. The contractor shall describe how and why the
scenarios compare and contrast vis-à-vis the prioritized indicators selected by the
planning group and technical committee. The SLR vulnerability map/layer shall be
layered on top of these scenarios in real-time in front of the participants so they can see
how SLR will impact the scenarios.
Deliverable:
• Presentation of four scenarios using Microsoft PowerPoint and/or their
scenario planning software tool and how and why they compare and contrast
with the SLR vulnerability map layered on top presented to workshop
attendees
Task 5: Participate in Scenario Planning Workshop II
The contractor shall present information and develop scenarios at the second scenario
planning workshop, which will be a full day in duration. The second workshop will be
held on the day following the first workshop.
Similar to the first workshop, all planning group and technical committee members will
be invited to attend the workshop, but local stakeholders (i.e., representatives from the 15
towns, the county, the MPO, the National Seashore, etc.) will be the primary audience.
An estimated 40 to 60 people will physically be in attendance. The Volpe Center will
ensure speakerphone and webconference access are available for participants in remote
locations and that a projector is available for the contractor to plug-in a laptop when
presenting information to the attendees. The Volpe Center will facilitate the workshop,
but working with the Volpe Center, the contractor shall perform the following key tasks.
The goal of this workshop is to develop a preferred transportation and land use scenario.
This scenario will generally identify preferred areas for growth and preservation and will
incorporate transportation services and measures that will reduce GHG emissions
compared to the status quo scenario.
Task 5.1 The Volpe Center will divide the participants into four small/break-out groups.
1. Each group will develop its own scenario on how Cape Cod’s transportation and
land use may change and develop over the next 20 years. The SLR vulnerability
map/layer and the list of transportation measures to reduce GHG emissions will
be provided to each group so they can account for SLR and the reduction of GHG
emissions in the development of their scenario.
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

27

2. Each group shall be equipped with a contractor-provided laptop loaded with the
scenario planning software tool and hardcopy, poster-sized maps to develop their
own scenarios in real-time. Four laptops will be necessary.
3. The contractor shall guide and assist in the development of scenarios being
crafted by each of the small/break-out groups.
4. Contractor staff shall be stationed at and operate each laptop/tool or shall train
Volpe Center staff to operate each laptop/tool in advance of the workshop in a
half-day training session held over the phone and via a webinar. The Volpe Center
will provide access to a webconference platform for this training if necessary.
Deliverable:
• Provision of a laptop loaded with the scenario planning software tool and
technical assistance to the members of each of the four small/break-out
groups; resulting maps in ArcGIS submitted to Volpe Center COTR
Task 5.2 Each small/break-out group will nominate a representative and present its
scenario and its assumptions/thought process to the larger group. Facilitated by the Volpe
Center and assisted by the contractor, the group will work collaboratively to reconcile
any differences between the scenarios. In real time, the contractor shall score the new
scenario vis-à-vis the performance indicators selected in Task 1.3.
Deliverable:
• Provision of technical assistance and real-time use of the scenario planning
software tool to develop a preferred scenario; resulting map(s) in ArcGIS
submitted to Volpe Center COTR
After the workshop, the Volpe Center will work with the state, the towns, Cape Cod
Commission, NPS, the FWS, and other agencies to create an implementation
strategy/plan at a more detailed/local level how the preferred scenario will be
implemented within their jurisdictions.
Task 6: Finalize the Preferred Scenario and Report
Task 6.1 Deliver the finalized preferred scenario to the Volpe Center. The finalized
preferred scenario shall be delivered in an ESRI ArcGIS geodtabase that includes FGDCcompliant metadata for all geodatabase elements so that it can be integrated into ArcGISbased programs currently in use on Cape Cod and within the state. All of the data
generated in the scenario planning process shall be delivered in Excel spreadsheets. Files
shall be delivered by email unless they are too large, in which case they shall be sent via
CD ROM. The files shall be received within two weeks of the completion of the
workshop.
Deliverables:
• Preferred scenario as a ArcGIS layer submitted to the Volpe Center COTR
• Excel spreadsheets with all data submitted to the Volpe Center COTR
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

28

Task 6.2 Create a final report. The final report shall compare all nine scenarios vis-à-vis
the performance indicators and maps and the final report shall describe all assumptions
and limitations inherent in the scenario planning process. The contractor shall submit a
draft of the report to the Volpe Center within three weeks following the workshop. The
contractor shall then revise the draft report in line with the Volpe Center’s comments
within two weeks of receiving said comments. The versions of the report shall be
transmitted via email.
Deliverables:
• Draft and final report in Microsoft Word submitted to the Volpe Center COTR
Task 7: Progress Reporting
Task 7.1 The contractor shall provide bi-weekly progress reports to the Volpe Center.
The progress reports shall include descriptions of work tasks completed during that time
period, up-to-date budget status, and identification of any issues that may affect project
schedule or project deliverables.
Deliverables:
• Bi-weekly progress reports in Microsoft Word format submitted to the Volpe
Center COTR
Task 7.2 The contractor shall attend and participate in planning group and technical
committee teleconferences. The planning group teleconferences occur every three
Thursdays from 11:00 AM to 12:30 PM Eastern. Technical committee teleconferences
occur on an ad hoc basis but no more than one per month. The contractor shall answer
any questions asked of the contractor during these teleconferences.
Deliverables:
• Attendance and participation in planning group and technical committee
teleconferences

4. PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE
The period of performance is five months after the award of the purchase order.

5. TRAVEL
All travel performed under this Purchase order must be approved by the Contracting
Officer's Technical Representative (COTR) and shall be performed in accordance with
Federal Travel Regulations (FTR). The actual costs for lodging, meals, and incidental
expenses will be considered reasonable and allowable if they do not exceed the maximum
per diem rates in effect at the time of travel as set forth in the FTR for Barnstable County,
MA. In accordance with FAR Subpart 31.205-46, a written justification must be provided
to the COTR for amounts higher than the FTR maximum amounts. Travel will be
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

29

reimbursed at actual costs (with a copy of the receipts for expenses) in the following
categories:
1.) Airline Tickets (commercial rates)
2.) Hotel Expenses (government rates unless pre-approved by the COTR)
3.) All Other Modes of Transportation (taxi receipts are not required if less than
$50.00)
Food and other miscellaneous expenses will be reimbursed at the prevailing FTR
reimbursement rates.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

30

6. PROJECT SCHEDULE AND COORDINATION

Task
1 – Provide Overview and Identify Performance Indicators
1.1 – Performance indicator list
1.2 – Overview presentation
1.3 – Teleconference and prioritized indicator list
2 – Develop Baseline and Preliminary Scenarios
2.1 – Establish a regional baseline

Due Date
(weeks from
project inception)

Format
(all Microsoft unless
otherwise noted)

Submission

1 week
2 week
Periodic

MS Word
MS PowerPoint
MS Word

Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR

3 weeks

7 weeks

ArcGIS map(s)
MS Word report
ArcGIS map(s)
MS Word report
ArcGIS map(s)
MS Word report
ArcGIS map(s)
MS Word report
ArcGIS map(s)

Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR

8 weeks
9 weeks

Participation
Travel and participation

Volpe Center COTR
N/A

9 weeks
9 weeks

MS PowerPoint or tool
MS PowerPoint or tool

Workshop attendees
Workshop attendees

9 weeks

ArcGIS map(s)

Volpe Center COTR

9 weeks

ArcGIS map(s)

Volpe Center COTR

11 weeks
15 weeks

ArcGIS map(s)
MS Word

Volpe Center COTR
Volpe Center COTR

2.2 – Status quo/trends continued scenario

4 weeks

2.3 – Current plans extended scenario

5 weeks

2.4 – Extreme development scenarios

6 weeks

2.5 – Integrated SLR map
3 – Prepare for Scenario Planning Workshops
3.1 – Agenda formulation
3.2 – Travel and attendance
4 – Participate in Scenario Planning Workshop I
4.1 – Brief overview of software tool
4.2 – Present status quo, current plans, and extreme
development scenarios
5 – Participate in Scenario Planning Workshop II
5.1 – Division into four small/break-out groups and
development of four scenarios
5.5 – Development of preferred scenario
6 – Finalize the Preferred Scenario and Report
6.1 – Final preferred scenario
6.2 – Final report

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

31

Attachment A
INSTRUCTIONS TO OFFERORS
TECHNICAL CRITERIA
The Offeror's technical proposal should include evidence of the following four criteria
which are in descending order of importance:
1. Staffing Requirements and Experience (resume of proposed representative[s]
shall be no more than 3 pages):
The Offeror’s representative(s) will possess skills appropriate to participating in a
scenario planning workshop and must possess the following minimum experience:
• Minimum of three years of regional scenario planning experience; experience
with rural and public lands is preferred.
• Possess strong technical, communication, and writing skills.
The Offeror shall submit two examples of scenario planning projects (summaries shall be
no more than 2 pages each) that they conducted that are relevant to this project: one
project shall involve GHG emission estimation/modeling and one project shall involve
vehicle miles traveled estimation/modeling. At least one data output report for one of
these examples shall be furnished (no minimum page length).
2. Methodology (no more than 5 pages):
•

Provide a description of: a) their scenario planning methodology (i.e., how the
contractor conducts its scenario planning process), b) the scenario planning
software tool’s land use and transportation typologies and how they are used at
the regional level, and c) how scenario planning software tool models GHG
emissions.
The Offeror shall describe, in sufficient detail, the approach to be used in performing the
tasks identified in the SOW. As part of this description, the Offeror shall describe how
the tool, its subroutine, or related extensions will calculate:
• GHG emissions,
• Transport energy use,
• Congestion and vehicle miles traveled, and
• Cost to implement the scenario.
3. Performance Indicator List
The Offeror shall provide a list in Microsoft Word of the universe of performance
indicators for which the Offeror is able to account in their scenario planning software
tool.
4. Scenario Planning Software Tool Checklist
The Offeror shall fill-out and submit the following checklist as a PDF or Microsoft Word
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

32

document.

□ The Offeror has a scenario planning software tool
□ The Offeror shall provide four laptops running the scenario planning software tool
for use at the scenario planning workshop

□ It is preferred if the Offeror can leave a copy of the scenario planning software
tool with the Cape Cod Commission and any of the 15 towns as requested

The scenario planning software tool must:

□ Operate as an ArcMap extension
□ Be able to run at the parcel level yet cover an entire region
□ Benchmark existing conditions
□ Be capable of designing transportation and land use scenarios in real-time
□ Utilize selected performance indicators to compare scenarios

It is preferred that the tool includes subroutines that estimate emissions from:

□ Different mixes of conventional internal combustion engine technology, gas-

electric hybrids, and flexible fuel vehicles; low-carbon fuels, clean diesels, and
clean diesels running on various biodiesel blends; and plug-in hybrids and allelectric vehicles running on various electricity supply mixes (ISO-New England
electricity mix, renewable generation, etc.).

□ Reducing vehicle miles traveled via increased transit, the re-institution of

passenger rail, increased ferry service, and the construction of bike paths and
lanes.

□ Roadway hardware changes (lighting, highly retroreflective material, etc.).
□ Solar panels and wind generation in highway rights of way.
□ Operational improvements.
□ Pricing strategies.
BASIS OF AWARD:

Award will be made to the Offeror who offers the best value to the Government in terms
of technical criteria (proposed staffing and training methodology) and price.
NOTE:
Reiteration of the SOW requirements does not constitute an acceptable response and will
be considered non-responsive.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

33

Appendix D: List of Potential
Performance Indicators
Provided by the scenario planning consultant in September 2010
The team can set up CommunityViz to model virtually any performance indicator whose
value can be expressed in a formula. We also know that modeling GHG emissions from
transportation is an area of intense study and that specialized models are required to
produce sophisticated results. Our intention is to rely on external models for the bulk of
the calculations and connect to them using CommunityViz external linking capabilities.
We will use a combination of our team’s own models and expertise, Volpe Centerprovided modeling assumptions, published models and modeling coefficients, and
reasonable planning assumptions for each model in consultation with the Volpe Center.
Based on our understanding of the RFP, we would suggest choosing from the following
list of indicators, depending on data availability and interest, but we are able and willing
to make reasonable changes or additions at the request of the Volpe Center.
Vehicle Miles Traveled
VMT for total study area
VMT by town
VMT per capita
Vehicle trips by mode
Implementation Costs of Mitigation Programs: Capital, Operational
Total study area
Per program:
alternative fuels
alternative modes
roadway hardware
renewal generation in highway rights-of-way
operational improvements
pricing strategies
Per capita
New roadway centerline distance
New bike lane centerline distance
Preservation of Natural/Existing Ecosystems: Total Study Area Indicators
Area consumed by sea-level rise
Open space consumed by development
High-value conservation lands/wetlands consumed by development
New development on or near critical or endangered habitat: dwelling units,
roadways, rail
New dwelling units within 1⁄2 mile of the projected 20-year shoreline
New impervious surfaces
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

34

Land Use, Social, and Economic Indicators for New Dwelling Units
Population: full-time and part-time
Dwelling units: by study area, by town, and by density
Employment: in season and off-season
Population density outside of open space
Land use mix
Building energy consumption
Accessibility Indicators for New Dwelling Units
Average distance to centers
Average distance to shoreline
Average distance to gateways
Population in transit service areas
Medium and high density dwelling units near centers
Medium and high density dwelling units near transit
Transit service area coverage
Bicycle network coverage
Transportation Energy Use
Total study area
By town
Per capita
On-road fuel consumption per capita
By transportation source or program:
conventional internal combustion passenger vehicles
gas-electric hybrids
flexible fuel vehicles
passenger rail
bus or BRT fleet
alternative fuel mix
Electric utility energy used for plug-in hybrids or all-electric vehicles
Greenhouse Gas, Ozone and Particulate Matter Indicators: CO2, CO, CH4,
SF6, HFC, NOx, ROG, PM10, PM2.5
Total study area
By town
Per capita
By transportation source or program:
conventional internal combustion passenger vehicles
gas-electric hybrids
flexible fuel vehicles
passenger rail
bus or BRT fleet
alternative fuel mix
electric utility energy used for plug-in hybrids or all-electric vehicles

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

35

Appendix E: Vulnerable Area Map and
Key

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

36

Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project
Expert Elicitation on Climate Change Impacts on Cape Cod – July 21, 2010
Index of Vulnerable Areas and Notes
1. Vulnerable coastal zone. Notes: Hatches Harbor dike is currently open, but its ability
to mitigate the impacts of sea level rise is limited. Risk: The area could be safe for
20 years or so but is likely vulnerable in any major storm.
2. Vulnerable due to erosion.
3. All of Provincetown’s roads, especially Commercial Street, are likely vulnerable now,
and SLR is expected to make them more vulnerable. There are few additional lands
to develop here, and coastal use issues are focused on how to address nonconforming coastal structures.
4. This area connects both sides of Cape Cod. It is in a low area, and therefore subject
to flooding.
5. The roadway is vulnerable to erosion and SLR impacts. The road is currently
maintained through replacement of sand. Without continued replacement, the road
would likely be lost. The steep area just south of this area supplies sand for other
areas via erosion.
6. Area of concern due to the occurrence of overwash in the past. The NPS has a
restoration project in this area that it has started work on.
7. The coastal area will probably not be breached as a result of SLR. Sea level rise will
increase rate of erosion on the bluff, but the waves will continue to form barrier
beach. This area is vulnerable to over wash, and will likely be more vulnerable over
time. Notes: Alterations to the roadway, Rte 6 or 6A, could help head off
environmental problems. The road to the north of this area has a dike, so it is no
longer a natural tidal system. The dike at this location would need to be opened to
allow flow between the fresh and salt water side to maintain a natural tidal regime.
8. The golf course is already below sea level, and is often flooded from ground water.
9. The area is located at low elevation and is vulnerable to SLR impacts from ground
water elevation.
10. Mayo Creek. The most dense part of the town is at a very low elevation and is likely
vulnerable to SLR.
11. Blackfish Ceek Highway is diked across the marsh and is vulnerable to SLR.
12. Highlighted area could be considered example of “passive adaptation.” Lieutenant
Island Road, the road out to the island, is closed twice a day at the high tides.
Residents have dealt with the road closures for many years.
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

37

13. Example of long engineered shoreline. Erosion is a problem along the bay. There is a
large concentration of homes in this area, and many have seawalls. The beaches are
replenished with sand in order to maintain the area. Harmes Way could collapse in
on itself. The area has been eroding for many years and is an example of sediment
mismanagement. Various erosion control structures in the area have stopped the
sediment supply and, as a result, it is rapidly changing. Coastal structures are still
allowed to be built in the area, but property owners are required to replenish the
sediment in front of the structures. As sea levels rise, it might become difficult to
keep up with sediment replenishment levels.
14. A, B, and C: These three areas are in a low-elevation marsh system. There is a need
to confirm the elevations on these roads.
15. This stretch of Route 28 in Orleans just before the Harwich line has had erosion
issues during large storms.
16. Route 6 crosses a low marsh area. The bike path is also in a low-lying area near the
marsh.
17. This area is a low-elevation area where SLR could become an issue, especially if
anything happens to the coastal barrier.
18. If the current Chatham fish pier is no longer viable as a port, this area would
presumably become the location of the new port system.
19. The coast is not eroding right now, but the area to the east is no longer a barrier
beach. Due to a storm, there is now an inlet and the area to the south is an island.
The area is now dissipating fairly rapidly; presumably there will rapid erosion as that
island continues to dissipate. An area to the north is armored, but it is not
sustainable. The entire shore will likely be cut a lot, and in the future the inner shore
will be the outer beach. This probably will not happen for at least 10 years. Note:
Economic activity at the Chatham fish pier will likely be impacted by changes in this
area.
20. The beach is eventually going to close in. It is a very low-elevation area. The harbor
will likely be closed as the beach washes in. The entire area is vulnerable to SLR
impacts and changes that will result with the beach is gone.
21. The road is at low elevation within tidal marshes. There are not issues with the area
currently, but as the sea level rises, it could become prone to flooding.
22. A: In Harwich, the ponds and estuaries are small and do not go in very far upland.
This area is more subject to storm damage and hurricanes. In terms of SLR, the
southern shore’s elevation would be a concern. Flooding will likely become worse as
SLR occurs. When the two harbors eventually connect will there likely be new
flooding areas.
Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

38

23. B: SLR will affect how far inland the flooding could go in this area and what happens
to the barrier beach. As sea level rises flooding will likely occur more often in this
area. The area at the center of the “hourglass” needs closer investigation. There are
potentially many problem areas there.
24. This area of Hyannisport is at low elevation. Existing flooding will likely occur more
frequently as a result of SLR.
25. A, B, C, D: Human management will likely dictate how severe SLR impacts will be
here. Potential elevation issues with Route 6A need to be examined more. Right
now, the road is fairly close to the water table, and thus could be impacted with
even minimal SLR. Sandy Neck: If sediment can continue to deposit along Sandy
Neck, then the area will likely be okay. Sandy Neck is still growing at the tip, but the
impacts of the jetties, which disturb the sediment distribution, is an issue that needs
to be considered. If the beach here, which is currently narrow, goes away
completely, erosion rates will increase. The sediment has been built up over a long
period of time. However, interruption to the sediment flow, which has been going on
for 100 years or so, is causing the beach to thin. With higher storm surges, issues
for marsh viability could be created. This area has the potential for a large scale
rapid environmental change. USACE could consider reviewing its dredging
management policies for the canal.
26. The main road in Falmouth is at low elevation. The Great Pond Bridge and “fingers”
of land in Falmouth are vulnerable to SLR, likely on the 40-50 year time horizon.
27. The entire Woods Hole area is at low elevation and vulnerable to flooding. The
effects will likely be worse as SLR occurs.
28. The bridge being rebuilt here has a lifespan of 75-years; yet, the road beyond the
bridge is vulnerable to erosion and is expected to be eroded away in approximately
50 years (In some places, Chapoquoit Road is already falling into the shore).
29. This area has a much higher potential for flooding due to the effects off of Buzzards
Bay.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

39

Appendix F: Potential GHG Reduction
Strategies
Description: The transportation strategies listed below are possible options that towns
and federal agencies on the Cape identified for potential implementation to reduce GHG
emissions. The strategies, which are organized into seven categories, are aimed at
reducing the amount of vehicle travel, increasing the use alternative transportation
modes, reducing the amount of fuel consumed, and increasing the use of alternative
fuels.

Pricing Strategies
Parking pricing

Charge parking fees for all parking in central business districts,
employment areas, and retail centers to encourage “park once”
behavior and reduce single occupant trips. In addition, higher
parking fees would be charged for ferry lots to encourage visitors
to take transit to the ferries. Other approaches include the
introduction of taxes or higher fees on otherwise free private
parking lots and parking management approaches, including
requirements for residential parking permits, as well as permits for
delivery and service vehicles and for visitors.

Pricing of major
facilities to access
the Cape

Collect tolls on congested facilities, such as on the bridges and/or
sections of Route 6. Local residents would receive discounts or be
exempt.

Ferry pricing

Charge higher fares on car ferries, and offer discounted fares for
non-vehicle ferries.

Land Use and Smart Growth Strategies
Growth
Management/
Incentive Zones

Establish designated Growth Incentive Zones (GIZ), to encourage a
concentrated mix of residential and commercial uses within village
centers and other areas of existing development, while ensuring
that all growth is properly served by adequate infrastructure. As
part of the GIZ designation process, towns shall protect land
outside these areas through the implementation of transferable
development rights, downzoning, conservation restrictions, and
other land protection measures.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

40

Nonmotorized Transportation Strategies
Pedestrian and
bicycle
accessibility

Tailor “complete streets” concepts to Cape Cod. Complete street
policies are intended to help make roadways safe, attractive, and
comfortable for all users, including pedestrians and bicyclists, as
well as drivers. Strategies include buffered sidewalks,
marked/signalized crossings, traffic calming measures such as bulbouts and median refuges.

Designate vehiclefree times or
locations

Plan car-free periods for areas of town and federal lands.

Promote trails

Expand user-friendly trail network to allow people to enjoy the
Cape outside their vehicles.

Public Transportation Strategies
Fare measures

Offer lower fares and/or discounted passes to visitors to encourage
transit use. For example, discounted bus passes could be
distributed via various lodging accommodations.

Increased levels of
service and
improved travel
times

Increase level of service on existing routes and improve travel
times through reduced headways, signal prioritization, and limited
stop service.

Expand intercity
bus and rail
services

Expand existing intercity bus and rail services and investment in
new routes.

Increased marine
transportation
services

Invest in new and expanded in the inland waterways and coastal
waterways.

Bus-only lanes

Restrict lanes on certain roadways, such as Route 3, to buses only.
Restriction can be time-dependent or permanent.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

41

Regional Ride-Sharing, Car-Sharing, and Commuting Strategies
Car- and bikesharing

Provide support to start up public, private, or nonprofit car-sharing
and/or bike-sharing organizations, including providing public street
parking, either subsidized or free, for the shared vehicles. Aim to
locate these facilities at the Island and Provincetown ferry
terminals and the airports. Cars in the fleet should be fuel efficient
or alternative fuel vehicles.

Employer-based
telework and
compressed work
week programs,
and employerbased TDM
requirements,
outreach, and
support

Encourage employer- and government agency-based telework and
compressed work-week programs to reduce the number of days
employees travel back and forth to their places of work.

Rental car facility
in Hyannis

Limit rental fleet to efficient/clean-fueled vehicles, such as hybrids
and electric-vehicles.

Link Smartcar and
bike rentals with
weekly lodging
rentals

Work with lodging and rental car facilities to provide visitors with
incentives to increase the use of fuel efficient vehicles and bicycles.

Encourage staff to
carpool when
commuting

Encourage municipal staff to carpool for commuting to work.
Strategies include sharing carpooling information with staff,
developing incentive programs, and increasing education on the
benefits of alternative forms of travel.

Encourage staff to
bike or take
alternative
transportation to
work

Establish an employee bike-to-work program and/or provide
monthly pass option for the Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority
(CCRTA).

Encourage citizens
and visitor
carpooling

Provide discounts and incentives for high occupancy vehicles.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

42

Operational and Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) Strategies
Eco-driving
training programs

Implement driver training programs on techniques that can reduce
gas consumption, such as avoiding rapid acceleration and braking,
reducing speeds, changing gears properly, and using cruise control.
These programs would also provide training on proper vehicle
maintenance, such as tire pressure, wheels, and motor oil.

Integrated
corridor
management

Use technology to coordinate a variety of intelligent transportation
system technologies across multiple corridors to reduce congestion.

Incident
management

Implement a variety of technologies to identify, respond to, and
clear incidents, including detection algorithm and free cell call
systems, closed-circuit TV cameras, on call service patrols, and
transportation management centers.

Ramp metering
(centrally
controlled)

Implement ramp metering to regulate the flow of traffic entering a
freeway to maintain a desired level of service.

Road weather
management
(snow, ice, fog,
and hurricane
emergency
evacuation)

Implement coordinated weather advisories, speed reductions, and
snow and ice treatments to promote safe operations when
conditions become severe.

Active traffic
management
based on traffic
conditions to
dynamically
change
signalization

Implement active traffic management based on traffic conditions to
dynamically change the speed limit on roadway segments or
temporarily convert shoulders to travel lanes.

Signal preemption
for congestion
management
strategies

Interconnect "smart" traffic signals to control remotely. As
congestion occurs, smart signals to give priority to congested
areas. System is also able to give priority to transit and emergency
vehicles.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

43

Operational and Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) Strategies
Traveler
Information (511
and DOT website)

Provide timely and accurate information to travelers about roadway
conditions and incidents, closures, and special events, as well as
alternate routes. The information would be communicated through
various systems, including variable message signs, advisory
services (such as 511 systems), and traveler information call
centers.

Freight
consolidation

Increase the consolidation of freight so that fewer trucks need to
travel to the islands.

Identify areas to
reduce or
eliminate mowing

Incorporate xeriscaping – a waste-efficient landscaping technique and increase the use native vegetation throughout landscaped
areas.

Vehicle Efficiency/Alternative Fuel Strategies
Incentivize use of
alternative
vehicles

Recognize those who are driving high efficiency (>40 mpg) or
alternative fuel vehicles with reduced fees at local attractions or
climate-friendly bumper stickers. Give incentives or discounts to
those traveling by bike or on foot.

Increase use of
alternative fuels

Run municipal and federal agency fleets, including cars, trucks,
non-road equipment and boats, on biodiesel or other climate
friendly fuels. Use B20 biodiesel in diesel fuel applications, and if
possible move up to using B50 biodiesel and B100 when
appropriate. Prioritize/require use of alternative fuel buses to areas
of heavy use and traffic. Provide incentives to convert local private
providers (Plymouth & Brockton, Cape Air, and others) to more
climate friendly fuels.

Increase
alternative fuel
infrastructure

Work with fuel providers to increase the availability of alternative
fuel infrastructure, including biodiesel, compressed natural gas
(CNG), and electricity.

Replace 2-stroke
engines

Look for opportunities to substitute two-stroke engines with more
efficient four-stroke engines in boats, snowmobiles and other
equipment. Minimize or eliminate use of leaf blowers.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

44

Vehicle Efficiency/Alternative Fuel Strategies
Encourage all
carriers to be
certified under
EPA's Smartway
Transport
Partnership

Encourage motor carrier companies to work with EPA to improve
the fuel efficiency of their trucks and reduce emissions from
transportation related activities.

Develop a vehicle
replacement plan

For municipal and federal agency fleets: benchmark existing fleetwide mile per gallon average and increase fleet fuel-efficient by
replacing vehicles with efficient or alternative fuel vehicles.

Right-size the
vehicle fleet

For municipal and federal agency fleets: use a Vehicle Allocation
Methodology (VAM) to achieve a fleet that is the right size and
type. A VAM defines appropriate vehicle type and use for specific
tasks and counters the tendency to size-up.

Replace 4-wheel
drive with 2-wheel
drive vehicles

For municipal and federal agency fleets: evaluate the need for 4wheel drive vehicles and replace with 2-wheel drive vehicles on
appropriate replacement schedule.

Electric
alternatives for
equipment

For municipal and federal agency fleets: evaluate the feasibility of
using electric equipment to meet certain needs.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

45

Appendix G: Priority Transportation Strategies for Cape Cod 31

31
Demographics of polling participants from Cape Cod: one from Upper Cape, three from Mid-Cape, and three from Lower Cape. No representatives from the Outer Cape participated
in the poll.

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

46

Outer Cape
Lower Cape
Mid Cape
Upper Cape
Entire Cape

Pricing
7.1%
7.1%
8.3%
16.7%
7.1%

Land Use &
Smart
Growth
7.1%
35.7%
25.0%
16.7%
35.7%

Non-motorized
Transportation
28.6%
7.1%
8.3%
8.3%
7.1%

Public
Transportation
42.9%
42.9%
41.7%
33.3%
50.0%

Regional Ride-sharing,
Car-sharing, and
Commuting
0.0%
7.1%
16.7%
8.3%
0.0%

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

Operational
and Intelligent
Transportation
Systems (ITS)
14.3%
0.0%
0.0%
16.7%
0.0%

Vehicle Efficiency /
Alternative Fuels
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

47

Appendix H: Scenario Planning
Workshop Agenda
Cape Cod Land Use, Transportation & Climate Change
Scenario Planning Workshop
November 15 & 16, 2010
Falmouth Public Library, 300 Main Street, Falmouth, MA 02540
Monday, November 15
12:45 PM

Registration

1:00 PM

Welcome - Ben Rasmussen, Volpe Center

1:10 PM

Federal Introductions

1:25 PM

State of the Cape - Paul Niedzwiecki, Cape Cod Commission

1:55 PM

Priority Ranking Ken Snyder, PlaceMatters

2:15 PM

Lightning Talks: Issues Affecting Cape Cod’s Future
 GHG Emissions and Energy
 Sea Level Rise and the Impacts of Climate Change
 Vehicle Miles Traveled and its Nuances
 Transit Ridership
 Water Issues on the Cape

2:45 PM

Break

3:00 PM

Presentation of 5 Pre-run Scenarios - Doug Walker, Placeways

3:45 PM

Regional Vision Mapping Exercise (rotation around 4 stations)
 Places to protect (treasured assets)
 Where to encourage residential
 Where to encourage employment
 Transportation needs/challenges

4:30 PM

Wrap-up Session (reconvene as large group) - Ken Snyder, PlaceMatters
 Review/discuss maps
 What to expect tomorrow

5:00 PM

Adjourn

Becky Lupes and Aung Gye, Federal Highway Administration
Amanda Rutherford, Kevin Percival, Peter Steele, National Park Service
Steve Suder, Fish and Wildlife Service

Brainstorming and keypad polling on top issues affecting Cape Cod

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

48

Tuesday, November 16
9:20 AM

Registration

9:30 AM

Welcome, Logistics, Recap of Monday - Ben Rasmussen, Volpe Center

9:50 AM

Preview of Scenario Planning Exercises - Placeways and PlaceMatters

10:00 AM

Break (participants go to assigned work station)

10:10 AM

Scenario Planning Exercises
Exercise 1: Where and How to Grow?
 Assign population and employment to scenario
 Show results of exercise, discuss, make adjustments
Exercise 2: Transportation Options
 Place transit stops, adjust frequencies of existing stops
 Show results of exercise, discuss, make adjustments

12:00 PM

LUNCH (Preferred Scenario Working Group begins to meet)

1:00 PM

Programs and Policies Aimed at Reducing GHG Emissions
 Large group presentation – Gina Filosa, Volpe Center
 Breakout group discussion on programs and policies most relevant
to different regions

2:20 PM

Break

2:40 PM

Large Group Reconvenes
 Prioritization with keypad polling
 Discussion of results

3:00 PM

Preferred Scenario
 Presentation by Preferred Scenario Working Group
 Group discussion

4:20 PM

Wrap-up Session
 Conclusions
 Q&A
 Next steps

5:00 PM

Adjourn

Appendices
Interagency Transportation, Land Use, and Climate Change Pilot Project

49

