`

REGIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS:
USEFUL INFORMATION FOR TRANSPORTATION AGENCIES

Prepared for:
Office of Planning, Environment and Realty
Office of Infrastructure
Federal Highway Administration, U.S. DOT

Prepared by:
ICF International
1725 Eye Street, NW
Washington, DC 20006

May 10, 2010
Contract No. DTFH61-05-D-00019; TOPR No. EV0101

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Acknowledgments
FHWA would like to thank the individuals listed below who provided guidance and
feedback on the climate effects information included in this report. Their insights and
information were critical to ensuring the scientific credibility of the data presented here.
FHWA looks forward to continued dialogue regarding the nature of the climate change
data that will be most useful to transportation practitioners in their efforts to adapt the
transportation system to a changing climate.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Virginia R. Burkett, U.S. Geological Survey
Arthur T. Degaetano, Cornell University
Katharine Hayhoe, Texas Tech University
David H. Levinson, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
A. David McGuire, U.S. Geological Survey, University of Alaska
Philip W. Mote, Oregon Climate Change Research Institute
Thomas C. Peterson, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Kelly T. Redmond, Western Regional Climate Center
David A. Robinson, Rutgers University, New Jersey
E. Robert Thieler, U.S. Geological Survey
Michael F. Wehner, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
Donald J. Wuebbles, University of Illinois

FHWA would further like to thank Thomas C. Peterson, Jay H. Lawrimore, Michael
Wehner, and Katharine Hayhoe for providing USGCRP climate projection data and
figures that are used extensively in this report. Though every effort was made to ensure
accuracy, FHWA and the authors are responsible for the information in this report.

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Table of Contents
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................. i
1
Introduction: Why Should the Transportation Community be Concerned with Global
Climate Change?................................................................................................................. 1
1.1
Observed Changes .............................................................................................. 3
1.2
Potential Future Impacts ..................................................................................... 5
2

Methodology Overview ............................................................................................ 12

3

Projected Climate Change by Geographic Region ................................................... 18
3.1
National projections .......................................................................................... 18
3.2
Regional Summaries ......................................................................................... 28
3.3
Northeast ........................................................................................................... 30
3.4
Southeast ........................................................................................................... 36
3.5
Midwest............................................................................................................. 41
3.6
Great Plains....................................................................................................... 46
3.7
Southwest.......................................................................................................... 49
3.8
Pacific Northwest.............................................................................................. 54
3.9
Alaska ............................................................................................................... 59
3.10 Hawaii ............................................................................................................... 63
3.11 Puerto Rico........................................................................................................ 66

4

Future Work .............................................................................................................. 69
4.1
Improvements to current projections ................................................................ 69
4.2
Additional climate variables or enhanced techniques....................................... 70

5

Acronyms and Glossary............................................................................................ 71

6

References................................................................................................................. 79

Appendix A. Detailed Methodology
Appendix B. Regional Maps
Appendix C. Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Executive Summary
“Climate affects the design, construction, safety, operations, and maintenance of
transportation infrastructure and systems. The prospect of a changing climate raises
critical questions regarding how alterations in temperature, precipitation, storm events,
and other aspects of the climate could affect the nation’s roads, airports, rail, transit
systems, pipelines, ports, and waterways.” CCSP 2008a
The changing climate poses serious challenges to the transportation community, given the
community’s need to watch over transportation systems and infrastructure designed to
last decades or longer. Transportation functions tied to construction, operations,
maintenance, and planning should be grounded in an understanding of the environment
expected to support transportation facilities. Decisions therefore need to be informed by
an understanding of potential future changes in climate. The understanding of climate
change science and the ability to model future change continues to advance, resulting in
more precise estimates of future changes in climate. However, the practitioner can be
overwhelmed by the sheer volume of information, including the ensemble of models
employed, the variety of emissions scenarios used to drive the modeling results, the
spatial resolution of the projected climate effects, and other parameters.
The purpose of this report is to provide the transportation community (including highway
engineers, planners, NEPA practitioners) with digestible, transparent, regional
information on projected climate change effects that are most relevant to the U.S.
highway system. This information is designed to inform assessments of the risks and
vulnerabilities facing the current transportation system, and can inform planning and
project development activities.
Why should the transportation community care about this information? The impacts of
climate change can include weakened bridges and road beds, temporarily or permanently
flooded roads, damaged pavements, and changes in road weather that can affect safety
and economic activity. Understanding and proactively addressing the potential impacts of
climate change can help avoid the potential damage, disruption in service, and safety
concerns that climate change may cause.
Climate change information is provided in this report by U.S. region, by time horizon,
and by climate variable or “climate effect” (i.e., changes in temperature, precipitation,
storm activity, and sea level). The multi-state regions are identical to those included in
the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) climate impact analyses
(USGCRP 2000, 2009). Three time horizons were chosen for each region: near-term
(2010-2040), mid-century (2040-2070), and end-of-century (2070-2100).
FHWA’s initial research efforts attempted to capture regional or sub-regional projections
from all publicly available, peer-reviewed studies for these climate effects. During the
course of this research, FHWA consulted with a range of nationally recognized climate
May 10, 2010

i

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

scientists to ask for their insights and recommendations regarding the most credible
regional projections for use by State DOTs and local transportation agencies. As a result,
FHWA obtained key data sets not previously published in their entirety, including data
compiled from the CMIP3 database of climate model integrations by Michael Wehner of
the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory for the USGCRP’s Global Climate Change
Impacts in the United States (2009) report. These and other data sets were further
evaluated and scrutinized, and subsequently vetted with a set of regional climate experts.
The results of this research provide a two-part resource to transportation practitioners:
1. Projected climate change effects in narrative form, supported by tables and maps,
for variables of interest, for specific time horizons, representing consistent
emission scenarios and a consistent presentation of uncertainty.
2. Detailed climate change projections for regions and, to the extent possible, subregional areas (e.g., cities, states) for all time horizons, uncertainty levels,
emission scenarios, and time horizons housed in the Climate Change Effects
Typology Matrix (Appendix C).
The process used to create this report and the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix
has resulted in a unique quantitative and qualitative regional analysis of the best available
climate projections. It also serves as a platform for discussions between transportation
officials and climate scientists. Looking forward, the approach used here and the
relationships forged in creating this set of climate information will assist future efforts to
refine and disseminate information on climate effects to transportation practitioners.
Some of the findings of this report are briefly outlined below. These illustrative findings
are by region and mostly for mid-century (i.e., showing projected effects in 2040 to 2070
relative to a 1961 to 1979 baseline), unless otherwise noted, and are based on averages
from a multi-model ensemble for a low emission scenario (B1) as well as a moderately
high (“business as usual”) emission scenario (A2) (USGCRP 2009)1:
o The Northeast is projected to become substantially warmer with an annual
mean increase of 3.8 to 4.8°F, and wetter, particularly during the winter
months. The duration of heavy precipitation events (i.e., more than 2 inches
per day) is projected to increase along with the average amount of rain falling
within a given rainy day.
o The Southeast is projected to undergo a 3.2 to 4.0°F increase in annual mean
temperature, with greater warming and reduced precipitation during the
summer and fall months.
o The Midwest is projected to experience an annual mean temperature increase
of 4.0 to 5.0° F, with much wetter winters and springs and drier summers.

1

For descriptions of emissions scenarios, see Appendix A.

May 10, 2010

ii

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

o The Great Plains’ annual mean temperature is projected to increase by 3.8 to
4.7°F, with wetter winters and drier summers.
o The Southwest is projected to experience an annual mean warming of 3.6 to
4.5°F, with summers and falls experiencing the greatest increases. The
Southwest’s winters are projected to be somewhat wetter, while the spring
months, in particular, are projected to be substantially drier.
o The Pacific Northwest is projected to experience an annual mean temperature
increase of 3.6 to 4.3°F, with the greatest warming and greatest reductions in
precipitation projected for the summer months.
o Alaska is projected to experience the greatest warming of any U.S. region,
with increases in annual mean temperature of 4.3°F, and the greatest warming
expected during the winter months. Precipitation increases are projected year
round, ranging from 9 to 17%, depending on the season.
o Annual mean temperature on the Hawaiian Islands is projected to increase by
2.7 to 3.3°F. Hawaii’s precipitation is projected to increase during the fall
months while the other seasons are projected to experience a decrease.
Recent estimates of global average sea-level rise by the end of the century range from 7
to 79 inches (IPCC 2007a; Rahmstorf 2007; Grinsted et al. 2009; Rohling et al. 2008;
Pfeffer et al. 2008). Most coastal regions in the contiguous United States are expected to
experience sea-level rise of this general magnitude. However, relative sea level will rise
more than the global average in regions experiencing a greater rate of subsidence of
coastal land (e.g., the Gulf Coast), whereas in fewer areas (e.g., parts of Alaska) local
uplift will dominate and relative sea level will rise less than the global average. In
addition to projected changes in vertical motion, local sea-level rise may also be affected
by such factors as local changes in ocean circulation, ocean density, gravitational effects,
sedimentation, and erosion.
Assessing the potential harm related to these climate effects allows highway planners to
identify and address vulnerabilities. Many of the risks from climate change come from an
increased exposure to weather and climate extremes. Since the highway system is
engineered to withstand the historically expected range of weather stressors, small
changes in average climate are not expected to cause significant impacts. However,
because future climate change is projected to transcend the bounds of historic experience,
it is likely to expose vulnerabilities. Impacts could include abrupt and unanticipated
disruptions to the system (such as a road washing out), or more gradual disruption (such
as an increased need for road maintenance).
In particular, extreme heat days, heavy precipitation events, high wind, and storm surge
all pose significant risks to the highway system. For example, extreme heat causes
thermal expansion on bridge joints and paved surfaces, which can result in structural
degradation. Heavy precipitation events can cause flooding or mudslides that block and

May 10, 2010

iii

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

damage roads. High winds during severe storms can damage street lights, signs, and
overhead cables. Storm surge can cause erosion of the road base and bridge supports. At
the same time, climate change can reduce exposure to other risks, particularly those
related to cold weather extremes. Decision makers may not wish to respond to every
potential climate risk, but identifying those risks will allow them to anticipate potential
disruptions and prioritize their responses.
The information in this report can help decision makers begin to address the challenges
posed by climate change. It fills an important gap by providing the transportation
community with information on climate change and the range of future changes in a
usable format. It provides the most up-to-date information available, and is the place to
start when seeking to understand how climate change may affect transportation systems
and infrastructure. At the same time, this report does not answer every question on future
climate change effects; research continues to progress on improving techniques for
projecting and assessing climate effects and understanding extreme weather events. In the
coming years, model simulations of the effect of changes in greenhouse gas
concentrations on the climate will improve, and downscaling techniques that provide
finer-scale climate projections will continue to evolve.

May 10, 2010

iv

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

1 Introduction: Why Should the Transportation Community be
Concerned with Global Climate Change?
The changing climate poses serious challenges to the transportation community, given
our need to watch over transportation systems and infrastructure designed to last decades
or longer. Transportation functions tied to construction, operations, maintenance, and
planning need to be based on an understanding of the environment expected to support
transportation facilities. Decisions therefore need to be informed by an understanding of
potential future changes in climate.
Changes in the climate over the recent past have been documented by researchers,
including changes in temperature, precipitation, storm activity, sea level, and wind
speeds. These effects can in turn lead to impacts on transportation, such as weakened
bridges and road beds, permanently flooded roads, damaged pavements, and changes in
road weather that can affect safety (both positively and negatively) and economic
activity. Understanding and proactively addressing the potential impacts of climate
change can help avoid the potential damage, disruption in service, and safety concerns
that climate change may cause.
FHWA is releasing this report in order to provide the transportation community (i.e.,
highway and bridge engineers, planners, NEPA practitioners, etc.) with transparent and
reliable information on projected climate change effects that are most relevant to the U.S.
highway system to the extent that such information was available through the summer of
2009.
This report synthesizes available information to present a picture of how the climate
might change over the near term (2010-2040), by mid-century (2040-2070), and at the
end of this century (2070-2100) for the country divided into nine regions, and it
summarizes the current understanding of these projected effects primarily at the regional
level. The nine regions match those used in the U.S. Global Change Research Program’s
Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States (2009) report.
There are several objectives in preparing this information. It is designed to help
transportation practitioners better understand what climate change means for
transportation, generally, and it is also intended to be considered where appropriate in
state and metropolitan planning and project development. For example, information on
changes in seasonal precipitation can inform analysis of stream flow and scour.
Projections of changes in summer temperatures can inform decisions tied to infrastructure
design and maintenance.
On the other hand, it represents an initial step in outlining the type and range of potential
future climate change effects facing transportation in the United States, and is meant to
be a starting point in understanding how climate change may affect transportation. It does
not provide all the information needed. The science of projecting future climate is
evolving, and in time more and better information should become available.
May 10, 2010

1

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

This report focuses on region-scale projections for temperature and precipitation, which
were assembled based on the results of global climate models. The data cited were
developed in support of the USGCRP document, but have not previously been published
in their entirety. This information exists for all regions of the country. Additionally, the
report includes the findings of a literature review in the Climate Change Effects
Typology Matrix (Appendix C). The Typology collects relevant projections of climate
change effects included in other reports and from peer-reviewed literature. Some of this
information is also included in the regional sections contained in chapter 3. This report
also includes results that were statistically downscaled from the results of climate models
to the sub-regional level. This information, which is presented in several figures in
Chapter 3 and Appendix B, is limited to the contiguous 48 states. The downscaling of
climate data is an area of continued development, with new techniques likely to become
available in the coming years.
While much of the information provided in this report applies to a region as a whole,
rates of change in a given location may or may not match projections for the larger
region. Thus, transportation agencies will need to work with environmental and
engineering staffs to determine what these regional projections mean for their local or
state level planning, programming, and maintenance efforts. The information in this
report can provide insights into the range of changes and trends that may influence the
state, local, or project level.
This report provides a first step in understanding the impacts that climate change may
have on existing and future transportation infrastructure and operations. Additional work
will be needed to understand how best to incorporate this information into project- and
system-level planning, to translate this information into specific impacts on
transportation, and to assess what if any modifications are necessary to the transportation
network to ensure its long-term ability to provide access and mobility for people and
goods. FHWA will undertake further work to develop tools, methods, and ultimately
guidance that can be used to apply climate change information to decision-making. We
will learn from further research (including our current work to develop preliminary tools
to assess the vulnerability and risk of transportation to the effects of climate change) and
the efforts of the transportation community, including State and local practitioners, on
how best to apply this information. Each program area—asset management, metropolitan
and statewide planning, project development, operations, safety, infrastructure, bridge,
pavements, etc.—may apply this information differently based on its specific needs, local
context, or other factors. As we gain more experience using this information, and the
science is updated and refined, we will provide additional guidance.
This chapter briefly examines climate variability experienced through the end of the 20th
century, focusing on the national level. It also summarizes a range of potential climate
impacts on the highway system that can result from changes in climate, and introduces
concepts such as risk and vulnerability. We have included this information early in the
report—before discussing the regional climate effects—to illustrate the importance of
examining the effects of climate change. Chapter 2 provides a brief overview of both the
methodology used to assemble the climate data for this report and the consultation
process with national and regional climate experts. (This methodology is treated in more
detail in Appendix A.) Chapter 3 summarizes and discusses the available data and
May 10, 2010

2

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

literature of projected climate change effects, focusing on the national and regional
levels. This information serves as the foundation of this report; with the rest of the
information providing context. Appendix B illustrates the Chapter 3 tables describing
regional climate projections of annual and seasonal temperature and seasonal
precipitation. Chapter 4 discusses needed future work, and identifies climate projections
that are currently unavailable. Chapter 5 includes a glossary of terms used in the report.
Chapter 6 provides the list of references.
Appendix C provides the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix and will be posted
online. It provides one-line summaries of the results of each current collected study or set
of modeled data for each of the main climate effects, by region, and time frame. It was
assembled while locating relevant information for this report. (Chapter 2 and Appendix A
provide a description of the methodology used in developing the Climate Change Effects
Typology Matrix.)
1.1 Observed Changes
This section provides a brief review of national-scale changes in temperature,
precipitation and storm activity, and sea level observed in recent decades. This
information is drawn largely from the IPCC (2007a), National Science and Technology
Council (2008), and USGCRP (2009) reports, and is based on satellite measurements and
data from thousands of weather stations, ships, and buoys around the world carefully
compiled by independent research groups.2
1.1.1

Temperature

Over the 20th century, the Earth’s annual average temperature has increased by
approximately 1.3 ± 0.32°F (0.74 ± 0.18°C) (IPCC 2007a). The winter and spring
seasons in the Northern Hemisphere have experienced the greatest degree of warming,
with the United States experiencing a warming of near 0.58°F per decade over the past
few decades (National Science and Technology Council 2008). As the frequency of heat
waves has increased, the number of unusually cold days has decreased (National Science
and Technology Council 2008; USGCRP 2009). However, over the past few decades, the
diurnal temperature difference has not changed, with day and night temperatures rising at
similar rates (USGCRP 2009).
The impact of this warming on the natural system has already been well documented. For
example, the area of Arctic sea ice has shrunk at a rate of about 2.7 percent per decade,
with the summer months experiencing even greater reductions of 7.4 percent per decade.
This is a result of warming in the Arctic that is twice the average warming in the United
States (USGCRP 2009). In the continental United States and Alaska (the middle and high
latitudes), shifts in phenology—the timing of life cycles events of plants and animals—
have been noted. These phenological changes include an increase in the growing season

2
Differences caused by changes in instruments, measurement times and locations, etc. were taken into account during
data processing in the reports referenced.

May 10, 2010

3

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

of approximately 2 weeks since 1950, and earlier annual occurrences of plant flowering
and animal spring migration (USGCRP 2009).
1.1.2

Precipitation and Storm Events

Over the 20th century, the total average annual precipitation for the contiguous United
States increased by 6 percent (National Science and Technology Council 2008). During
the second half of the 20th century, some regions across the United States have
experienced increases in drought severity and duration as temperatures have risen
(USGCRP 2009). The United States has experienced extreme drought events in the past,
such as during the mid-1930s when portions of the Great Plains became known as the
“dust bowl” due to wind erosion brought on by several years of drought and compounded
by the replacement of moisture-retaining natural vegetation with crops. Since the 1950s,
parts of the Southeast and West have experienced an increase in drought conditions,
while the Midwest and Great Plains have experienced a reduction.
During the last three decades of the 20th century, the eastern United States experienced an
increase in heavy precipitation events3 (National Science and Technology Council 2008),
and an increase in the proportion of total annual precipitation that falls during heavy
precipitation events.
While recent research indicates there is some likelihood that the number of tropical
storms and hurricanes each year in the North Atlantic has increased over the past 100
years (National Science and Technology Council 2008), the number of hurricanes that
make landfall has stayed relatively constant (USGCRP 2009). The intensity of the
strongest hurricanes is also likely to have increased in this region: sea surface warmth is a
strong contributor to tropical storm development, and climate change is considered to
have contributed to the increase of sea surface temperatures in the North Atlantic and
Northwest Pacific hurricane formation regions (CCSP 2008b). However, it is unclear if
and how other tropical storm development factors—such as temperature and moisture
profiles, wind shear, or near-surface ocean temperature stratification—have changed. The
trend is further complicated by multi-decadal variability and data-quality issues. For
smaller-scale phenomena such as tornadoes, hail, lightening, and dust storms, the IPCC
(2007a) concluded that there is insufficient evidence to determine the associated trends.
1.1.3

Sea-Level Rise

Over the 20th century, global average sea level has risen by 6.7 inches (0.17 meters)
(IPCC 2007a). Figure 1 below demonstrates how sea-level rise varies regionally across
the United States. These differences are due primarily to differences in vertical land
motions (USGCRP 2009). Relative sea level is rising 0.8 to 1.2 inches per decade along
most of the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts, with a few inches per decade occurring along the
Louisiana Coast due to land subsidence (National Science and Technology Council
2008). Other regions of the country, such as specific coastline locations for Alaska, are
3

Heavy precipitation events are defined by the referenced reports as an event with at least 2 inches of precipitation per
day. For purposes of this report, heavy precipitation events constitute a storm event; however, given the limitation of
the information provided, no discussion of the type of storm, the associated phenomena such as winds, nor the related
stressors such as flooding can be determined.

May 10, 2010

4

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

experiencing land uplift and a corresponding relative sea level decline of a few inches per
decade (National Science and Technology Council 2008). Sea-level rise increases the risk
of impact from storm surge and waves farther inland, causing shoreline erosion and local
damage.

Figure 1: Observed changes in relative sea level from 1958 to 2008 for locations on the U.S. coast.
Some areas along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts saw increases greater than 8 inches over the past 50
years. (Source: Zervas 2001)

1.2 Potential Future Impacts
Assessing the potential harm of climate stressors allows vulnerabilities to be addressed
before they become problems. For example, knowing that a road used during emergency
evacuations will be at risk for failure due to erosion allows decision makers to decide
what to do before the road washes out. Transportation decision makers may decide to
take measures to prevent the road from washing out or find another route. They may also
decide that the costs of action are too great, and the risks are too low (or the likelihood of
damage is too low), to justify any action. However, in order to make such decisions, an
assessment of the climate-related risks is necessary.

May 10, 2010

5

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

1.2.1

Connecting Climate Changes to Impacts

Projected changes in
temperature, precipitation,
Vulnerability describes how susceptible a system is to the
storm activity, wind, and sea
adverse effects of climate change (IPCC 2007b).
level indicate the magnitude of
the stressors to which highway
Vulnerability Factors include the age of the infrastructure
element, condition/integrity of the infrastructure element,
infrastructure could be
proximity to other infrastructure elements/concentrations, and
exposed in the future.
the level of service (CCSP 2008).
However, these effects do not
in and of themselves indicate
Exposure is the degree to which a system comes into
what the ultimate
contact with climate conditions or specific climate impacts
consequences to the highway
(CIG 2007), and the probability, or likelihood, that this stress
infrastructure will be. From a
will affect transportation infrastructure (CCSP 2008a).
highway operations
standpoint, does it actually
Risk characterizes both the probability of the event occurring
matter that temperatures or
and the consequence of the event (Snover et al. 2007;
rainfall might increase? And
NZCCO 2004).
would these effects translate to
Potential Climate Impacts describes how projected climate
beneficial or adverse impacts
effects may affect the highway system through current or
on the highway system? The
newly introduced system exposures or sensitivities. It should
answers depend on many
be noted that the uncertainties associated with projecting the
factors, such as the severity of
impacts continue to apply when considering risks (which also
the climate stressor, the
have the additional uncertainty of consequences).
engineering and design
characteristics of the
structures, geographic and geologic characteristics, and operations and maintenance
activities. It is therefore important to consider all of these factors when assessing the
potential impacts of climate change.
While consideration of so many variables may seem daunting, it is important to
remember that highway structures are already being exposed to many climate- or
weather-related stressors. Climate change can exacerbate (or lessen) these same stressors.
Highway infrastructure is already exposed to (and, to a certain extent, designed to
withstand) the elements. An area that rarely experiences severe storms is unlikely to
suddenly experience frequent hurricanes. Instead, an area already exposed to severe
storms may experience more severe or more frequent storms. Since infrastructure is
designed to withstand locally expected climate stressors of the magnitude and frequency
that have historically been experienced, the risks from climate change can come from an
amplification of existing stressors (NRC 2008).
In some cases, climate changes will be sufficient to push some aspect of a transportation
system over a certain threshold. For example, rising sea levels can introduce erosion
problems to areas that previously had limited exposure to those threats, and thereby
undermine roadways that had previously been unaffected by erosion. For inland areas,
May 10, 2010

6

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

falling lake levels can lead to erosion of bedrock due to wave impacts, causing roads to
fail.
Many of the risks from climate change come from an increased exposure to extremes in
weather and climate. One example is a projected increase in the number of days with
extremely high temperatures, which cause more stress than simply an increase in the
average temperature. Most infrastructures are engineered to withstand a normal or
expected range of climate or weather stressors, and small changes in average climate
won’t have significant impacts on the structures themselves (NRC 2008). However, as
the climate changes, the expected range of stressors may not accurately reflect actual
exposure. For example, bridges are often designed to withstand a certain level of flooding
(such as the height of a flood that normally has a 1% likelihood of occurring in a year,
i.e., a 1 in 100 year flood event), a probability that is typically based on historical data.
Under some climate change scenarios, a flood level that has a true 1% annual likelihood
of occurring might actually be much more severe than the historical 1% return rate flood.
It is also important to note that not all climate change impacts are negative. In some
areas, climate change could reduce the frequency, duration, and/or severity of some coldweather extremes, for example. In these cases, shorter winters may lead to longer thaw
seasons, or higher temperatures could allow an extension in the work season—both of
which are potential benefits. But generally, it is useful to keep in mind that any deviation
from the climate for which infrastructure has been designed is likely to cause negative
impacts (CCSP 2008b; USGCRP 2009).
1.2.2

Potential Impacts to Highways

Climate change impacts on highway infrastructure can be sudden and severe, or may
occur more gradually. Floods and erosion can completely and abruptly shut down a road.
In contrast, an increase in the frequency and severity of extremely high temperatures can
lead to pavement deterioration and rutting. These more gradual problems can be
predicted and addressed through additional maintenance, but they are still costly and
disruptive to traffic flow. This difference is important to remember when assessing
priorities in climate adaptation. Are decision makers concerned primarily with sudden
and severe highway system failures, or more generally with minimizing costs and travel
disruptions?
When considering potential impacts on the highway system, it is also important to keep
in mind the interconnectivity of the highway system. When looking at a specific
geographic area, it can be tempting to dismiss climate stressors as not being relevant to
that area. But disruptions in highway systems in one location can affect the timely
delivery of goods in another location; they can also disrupt passenger travel.
Additionally, areas most affected by climate change might ultimately draw larger
amounts of money to repair damages and reduce future damages—diverting resources
that could have been applied elsewhere.
Highway infrastructure and operations/maintenance are affected by three key categories
of climate change effects: changes in temperature, changes in precipitation and storm
May 10, 2010

7

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

events, and sea-level rise. This section continues by providing some example impacts that
these climate effects can have on highways. The information provided in the tables below
is based on a collection of existing reports and is provided for this discussion; however,
the tables do not represent all plausible potential impacts. Actual impacts would depend
on local conditions as well as the severity of climate change effects.
1.2.3

Changes in Temperatures

Small changes in average temperatures will not greatly affect highway systems; however,
by the end of the century some regions are projected to experience significant warming
that will affect highway planning, construction, and operations. Significant impacts may
also occur with increases in both the intensity (how high the high temperature is) and
duration of very hot periods, or decreases in the intensity and duration of periods with
very cold days. Extreme temperatures can cause both structural damage to highway assets
and challenges to the use and maintenance of the roads. As noted in Section 3, the
number of extreme heat days is project to increase in all regions of the continental United
States. Meanwhile, the shortening of the winter season could provide some benefits in
terms of lengthening the construction season and reducing snow/ice removal costs,
particularly in the more northern regions. However, the northern states are projected to
sustain increases in freeze-thaw conditions,4 potentially increasing the occurrence of frost
heaves and potholes on road and bridge surfaces (USGCRP 2009). Table 1-1 provides a
summary of how changes in temperature may affect highway infrastructure and
operations.
Climate Effects
Increases in very hot days
and heat waves (higher
high temperatures,
increased duration of heat
waves)

Impacts on Infrastructure and Operations

• Increased thermal expansion of bridge joints and paved surfaces,
causing possible degradation

• Concerns regarding pavement integrity, traffic-related rutting and
•

•
•
•
Decreases in very cold
days

Later onset of seasonal
freeze and earlier onset of
seasonal thaw

migration of liquid asphalt, greater need for maintenance of roads and
pavement
Maintenance and construction costs for roads and bridges; stress on
bridge integrity due to temperature expansion of concrete joints, steel,
asphalt, protective cladding, coats, and sealants
Asphalt degradation, resulting in possible short-term loss of public
access or increased congestion of sections of road and highway
during repair and replacement
Limits on periods of construction activity, and more nighttime work
Vehicle overheating and tire degradation

• Regional changes in snow and ice removal costs, environmental
•
•
•
•

impacts from salt and chemical use
Changes in pavement designs
Fewer cold-related restrictions for maintenance workers
Changes in seasonal weight restrictions
Changes in seasonal fuel requirements

4

Freeze-thaw conditions refer to the number of days when the maximum temperature is greater than freezing and the
minimum temperature is below freezing.

May 10, 2010

8

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

• Improved mobility and safety associated with a reduction in winter
weather

• Longer construction season in colder areas
Table 1-1: Impacts of temperature on highway operations and infrastructure. Sources: NRC (2008), CCSP
(2008a), CSIRO (2006), Department of Transport (U.K.) (2004)

1.2.4

Changes in Precipitation and Storm Events

Increased rains can cause disruptions in the use of highways (mainly due to flooding), as
well as structural damage. In some areas, however, drought conditions are expected to
increase, which can introduce other threats to the highway system. For example, summer
precipitation is expected to decrease for most regions (see Section 3), which could lead to
isolated pockets of increased drought-related impacts. Winter precipitation for most
regions is projected to increase, which could result in additional snow and ice removal
costs (particularly for the Northeast Great Plains and Midwest states).5 However, in many
cases, those impacts are generally projected to be less in areas and at times of year that
are now just below freezing but projected to warm above freezing in the future.
Storms such as tropical cyclones, thunderstorms, and extratropical cyclones can cause
sudden, dramatic, and costly disruptions to the highway systems. Use of the highways
can be disrupted as a result of flooding or structural failures. Severe winds and rains can
also cause significant damage to structures. Table 1-2 provides a summary of how
changes in severe storm intensity may affect highway infrastructure and operations.
Climate Effects
Increases in intense
precipitation events

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Increases in drought
conditions
Changes in seasonal
5

•
•
•

Impacts on Infrastructure and Operations
Increases in weather-related delays and traffic disruptions
Increased flooding of evacuation routes
Increases in flooding of roadways and tunnels
Increases in road washout, landslides, and mudslides that damage
roadways
Drainage systems likely to be overloaded more frequently and
severely, causing backups and street flooding
Areas where flooding is already common will face more frequent and
severe problems
If soil moisture levels become too high, structural integrity of roads,
bridges, and tunnels (especially where they are already under stress)
could be compromised
Standing water may have adverse effects on road base
Increased peak streamflow could affect scour rates and influence the
size requirement for bridges and culverts
Increased susceptibility to wildfires, causing road closures due to fire
threat or reduced visibility
Increased risk of mudslides in areas deforested by wildfires
Benefits for safety and reduced interruptions if frozen precipitation

Personal communication with Michael Wehner of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

May 10, 2010

9

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

precipitation and stream
flow patterns

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Increases in coastal storm
intensity (leading to higher
storm surges/wave heights,
increased flooding,
stronger winds)

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

shifts to rainfall
Increased risk of floods, landslides, gradual failures and damage to
roads if precipitation changes from snow to rain in winter and spring
thaws
Increased variation in wet/dry spells and decrease in available
moisture may cause road foundations to degrade
Degradation, failure, and replacement of road structures due to
increases in ground and foundation movement, shrinkage and
changes in groundwater
Increased maintenance and replacement costs of road infrastructure
Short-term loss of public access or increased congestion to sections
of road and highway
Changes in access to floodplains during construction season and
mobilization periods
Changes in wetland location and the associated natural protective
services that wetlands offer to infrastructure
More frequent and potentially more extensive emergency
evacuations
More debris on roads, interrupting travel and shipping
Bridges, signs, overhead cables and other tall structures are at risk
from increased wind speeds
Increased storm surge and wave impacts on bridge structures
Decreased expected lifetime of highways exposed to storm surge
Risk of immediate flooding, damage caused by force of water, and
secondary damage caused by collisions with debris
Erosion of land supporting coastal infrastructure and coastal
highways
Damage to signs, lighting fixtures, and supports
Reduced drainage rate of low-lying land after rainfall and flooding
events
Damage to infrastructure caused by the loss of coastal wetlands and
barrier islands

Table 1-2: Impacts of precipitation on highway operations and infrastructure. Sources: NRC (2008),
CCSP (2008a), CSIRO (2006), personal communication with E. Robert Thieler.

1.2.5

Sea-Level Rise

Rising sea levels can permanently inundate coastal roads and cause damaging erosion.
Higher sea levels can exacerbate the effects of storm surge, causing storm surges to reach
greater heights and further inland, possibly inflicting additional damages on structures.
Sea-level rise presents significant risks to many regions, particularly those where land is
subsiding. Table 1-3 provides a summary of how changes in sea-level rise may affect
highway infrastructure and operations (as changes in storm surge are a function of both
storm activity and sea-level rise, the impacts provided in Table 1-3 overlap somewhat
with those at the end of Table 1-2).

May 10, 2010

10

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Climate Effects
Rising sea levels
(exacerbating effect of
higher storm surge,
increased salinity of rivers
and estuaries, flooding)

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Impacts on Infrastructure and Operations
Exposes more areas to effects of storm surge/wave action, causing
more frequent interruptions to coastal and low-lying roadway travel
Amplifies effect of storm surge, causing more severe storm surges
requiring evacuation
Permanent inundation of roads or low-lying feeder roads in coastal
areas. Reduces route options/redundancy
More frequent or severe flooding of underground tunnels and lowlying infrastructure, requiring increased pumping activity
As the sea-level rises, the coastline will change and highways that
were not previously at risk to storm surge and wave damage may be
exposed in the future
Erosion of road base and bridge supports/scour
Highway embankments at risk of subsidence/heave
Reduced clearance (including freeboard) under bridges
Increased maintenance and replacement costs of tunnel infrastructure

Table 1-3: Impacts of sea-level rise on operations and highway infrastructure. Sources: NRC (2008),
CCSP (2008a), CSIRO (2006), ICF (2007)

May 10, 2010

11

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

2

Methodology Overview

The projections of climate change effects presented in this report were developed through
a systematic process initiated by FHWA in the summer of 2009. This section describes
the key elements of FHWA’s methodology; Appendix A provides more details on the
approach, which provides climate change information by U.S. region, by time horizon,
and by climate variable. The regions are identical to those used in the U.S. Global
Change Research Program (USGCRP) climate impact analyses (USGCRP 2000, 2009).
Three time horizons were chosen for each region: near-term (2010-2040), mid-century
(2040-2070), and end-of-century (2070-2100). Projected changes in climate are reported
for temperature, precipitation, storm events, and sea-level rise.
As described below, initial research efforts attempted to capture regional or sub-regional
projections from all publicly available, peer-reviewed studies for these climate effects.
During the course of this research, FHWA consulted with a range of nationally
recognized climate scientists for their insights and recommendations regarding the most
credible regional projections for use by State DOTs and local transportation agencies. As
a result of these conversations, FHWA gained access to key data sets not previously
published in their entirety, including data compiled from the CMIP3 database that
underlies the USGCRP’s Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States (2009)
report. The tables of regional climate changes provided in this report were derived from
an analysis of that data set. That information is complemented with the results of an
extensive literature search and review, which is summarized in Appendix C. The search
was conducted using a variety of databases of journal articles, government reports, and
other peer-reviewed publications encompassing a variety of spatial scale information
from regional- to city-scale.
The conclusions and data sets revealed through these efforts were further evaluated and
scrutinized, and subsequently vetted with regional climate experts. A methodology was
developed that identified which studies in the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix
correlated with optimum model characteristics, and these studies were then included in
the regional narrative in the main report.
It should be noted that each study cited in this report has a unique set of model
characteristics and associated uncertainty,6 which makes comparing results across studies
challenging. Although all of the differences in assumptions and approaches among these
6

As described by Hawkins and Sutton (2009), model uncertainty, natural variability uncertainty, and scenario (i.e.,
GHG emissions scenario) uncertainty contribute to the total uncertainty associated with each projection. The structure
of a modeling study helps define the associated uncertainty. For example, the magnitude of the uncertainty related to
each of the three factors varies according to the time horizon of the projections. Hawkins and Sutton (2009) find that
natural variability represents a large portion of the total uncertainty in applying climate projections in the near-term,
dropping off significantly by mid-century. Model uncertainty is also a significant contributor to total near-term
uncertainty and tends to stay relatively similar in magnitude through the projected century. For mid-century, the
scenario and model uncertainties are somewhat similar in magnitude. For end-of-century, the scenario uncertainty
contributes the greatest degree of uncertainty to the total. These uncertainties also change relative to each other when
projections are provided at a smaller spatial scale (i.e., global to regional). For finer scale analysis, natural variability,
in particular, significantly affects total uncertainty of a projection across all future time periods.

May 10, 2010

12

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

studies are not explicitly described in this report, care was taken to ensure that only
logically comparable aspects of the studies are presented.
FHWA’s methodology for identifying, categorizing, reviewing, and presenting
projections of climate change effects in this report involved the following steps:
(1) Selection of relevant climate effects: The climate change effects determined to
most affect highways and highway networks and discussed in this report include
changes in average and extreme temperature, changes in average and extreme
precipitation, and sea-level rise. Several recent reports have highlighted the
importance of these effects with respect to the U.S. transportation system and
highways in particular (NRC 2008; USGCRP 2009; CSIRO 2006; CIG 2007).
Extreme precipitation is associated with storm activity such as convective storms,
extratropical storms, or tropical storms. There is limited information available
pertaining to storm activity projections that describes changes in storm intensity,
frequency, and duration. Additional variables such as relative humidity, solar
radiation, and extreme cold events are also relevant, but regional information for
these variables was not available for inclusion in this report.
(2) Literature review: The compilation of regional projections began with a
literature search using relevant, carefully composed search terms across relevant
databases of publications on the environment, energy, technology, and
government.
(3) Screening literature review findings: The search was refined to include articles,
government reports, and peer-reviewed publications with a published date post2003 and available by June 2009. Effort was made to include seminal reports that
became available after this date. This approach was taken to ensure that the
versions of the climate models used were less likely to draw from out-of-date
parameterizations, and that the emission scenario projections used were more
likely to be based on the IPCC SRES scenarios used in the Fourth Assessment
Report.
(4) Populating the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix: The literature was
organized into the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix (located in Appendix
C) by U.S. region based on a recent panel-reviewed report (USGCRP 2009); by
time horizon where near-term represents 2010-2040, mid-century represents
2040-2070, and end-of-century represents 2070-2100; by climate effects (listed in
the order of temperature, precipitation, storm activity, and sea-level rise); and by
spatial coverage.
(5) Consultation with federal climate experts: A group of national federal climate
experts from organizations including NOAA’s National Climatic Data Center,
USGS, DOE and others provided guidance on the criteria used in this report for
determining whether a study would be included in the Section 3 regional
narratives. There was a strong consensus for providing a plausible range of
projections (tied to the low B1 and moderately high A2 IPCC greenhouse gas
emissions scenarios) as opposed to a single point value for the mid-century and
May 10, 2010

13

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

end-of-century projections. Projections of seasonal and annual temperature and
seasonal precipitation compiled from CMIP3 database for use in the 2009
USGCRP report were used together with the results of the literature review (see
Appendix A for more information on the emissions scenarios).
(6) Additional data analysis and refinements to regional climate change data:

This report includes new analyses of the CMIP3 database of climate model
integrations compiled by Michael Wehner of the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory and used in the USGCRP (2009) report.7 Regional values are
determined by using the corresponding grid cells of each climate model that fall
within each region (Figure 6, for example, was developed using this collection of
projected data). Then for each region and each of the three time frames, the
following statistics have been computed for temperature and precipitation:
“mean,” “likely,” and “very likely” (see below for a definition of terms). The
results are included in regional tables in Chapter 3, the regional maps in Appendix
B, and the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix (Appendix C). These results
provide mean conditions (as opposed to variability) at the regional scale.
(7) Inclusion of downscaled data: High-resolution temperature and precipitation

projections for the continental United States developed through statistical
downscaling of the results of 16 climate models of the CMIP3 database were
provided to FHWA (Liang et al. 1994; Maurer et al. 2002).8 The projections are
provided for a low (B1) and moderately high (A2) emission scenarios for three
future projections including near-term (2010-2039), mid-century (2040-2069),
and end-of-century (2070-2099) relative to a 1971-2000 baseline. Figures of the
temperature projections are provided in Appendix B, while figures of thresholds
such as extreme temperature are provided within this report (Maurer et al. 2002;
Maurer et al. 2008). Downscaled data may be preferred when projections are
required for an area finer than the spatial resolution provided by the climate
models; particularly if the location is not well-represented by the larger-scale
averages. In addition, downscaling data provides a mechanism for translating
larger-temporally scaled climate model projections to finer-temporally scaled
climate variability.
(8) Consultation with regional climate experts: The Climate Change Effects
Typology Matrix was vetted with regional climate experts to discuss studies
included and identify any missing studies. Based on this review, some studies
were removed from the matrix or placed into the national section. The
consultation also included discussions of particular regional problematic climate
effects. There was a general consensus that it is important to not “cherry pick”
7
These values are averaged for each region from the corresponding grid cells of each climate model in the CMIP3
database. This is appropriate as the information provides mean conditions of temperature and precipitation at the
regional scale. Statistical downscaling of the CMIP3 database for the continental United States is used in this report for
the figures of extremes (such as the days the maximum temperature reaches or surpasses 90°F); the downscaling results
are not available for locations outside the continental United States. See Appendix A for more information.
8
Bias-corrected and spatially downscaled climate projections derived from CMIP3 data, described by Maurer et al
(2007). We acknowledge the Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison (PCMDI) and the WCRP's
Working Group on Coupled Modelling (WGCM) for their roles in making available the WCRP CMIP3 multi-model
dataset. Support of this dataset is provided by the Office of Science, U.S. Department of Energy.

May 10, 2010

14

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

climate models for calculating the mean and ranges from the USGCRP data.
Alaska is the exception where the general consensus was to draw results from the
five top performers identified by the Walsh et al. (2008) study.
(9) Treatment of uncertainty: There is always some degree of uncertainty
associated with model projections. The Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix
includes this information, when included in the source study, in a column labeled
“certainty.” In general, the model projections are more uncertain the further they
are into the future. A small range of uncertainty tends to exist in the near-term
time horizon, while a larger range of plausible values exists for the long-term. The
temperature and precipitation information from the USGCRP data set that are
presented for each region were quantitatively analyzed in this study to
characterize plausible future climate conditions and the associated uncertainty.
Each scenario/model combination produces a single data point. There are 15
models run for the A2 emission scenario to 19 models run for the B1 emission
scenario, producing 15 to 19 mean results for each variable in each time frame.
The following information is provided for precipitation and temperature for each
region (see Figure 2):

o “Mean” – The mean range is the average of all of the simulations in the
lower emission scenario (B1) and the average of all of the simulations in
the higher emission scenario (A2). It is a simple measure of the central
tendency of the projections and the uncertainty associated with future
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission rates.
o “Likely” – The likely range is computed by first determining the standard
deviation above and below the mean for each scenario.9 Then, the
minimum and maximum of these four values (i.e., two from each scenario)
are defined as the likely range. The range is a measure of the differences
(and uncertainty) associated with the models that were used, as well as the
uncertainty of future GHG emission rates.
o “Very Likely” – The very likely range is computed in the same way as the
likely range, except that two standard deviations are used instead of one. 10

9

Assuming the data are well represented by a Gaussian distribution, the likely range represents about 68% of the values
extending from the 15th percentile to the 85th percentile.
10
Assuming the data are well represented by a Gaussian distribution, the very likely range represents about 95% of the
values extending from the 2.2th percentile to the 97.8th percentile.

May 10, 2010

15

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Figure 2: This figure describes the process of creating the mean, likely, and very
likely ranges from the USGCRP data and reported in Section 4. A curve
represents an idealized version of connecting the points of results obtained from a
variety of climate models. The blue curve and associated labels represent the
mean, likely, and very likely values for a given emission scenario; likewise for the
green curve assuming a Gaussian distribution. Each curve describes model
uncertainty for the given emission scenario. The ranges provide the uncertainty
associated with both the emission scenario and the climate models.

(10)
Developing Regional Narratives for Section 3: A methodology was
developed to synthesize the array of projections provided by the Climate Change
Effects Typology Matrix into a regional narrative discussion that can assist in
informing future analysis of climate impacts on the highway system. The criteria
used in this report for determining whether a study would be included in the
regional narratives of Section 3 were guided by discussions with climate experts
and are illustrated in Figure 3.

May 10, 2010

16

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Was the study conducted
recently (e.g., post 2003)?

No

Not included

Yes

Does the study include a
number of climate models
(optimum models if identified for
that region)?

No

Not included

Yes

Does the study include relevant
emission scenarios?

No

Not included

Yes

Are the data at the regional
scale or downscaled for finer
spatial scale results?

No

Not included

Yes

Include in regional discussion

Figure 3: Criteria used to assess whether a study is
included in the narrative regional discussions.

May 10, 2010

17

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3 Projected Climate Change by Geographic Region
This section begins with a brief review of national-scale changes in temperature,
precipitation, sea level, and storm activity. This information is drawn largely from the
USGCRP (2009) report. These national-scale descriptions are followed by the core of this
report: a series of sections providing the current state of the knowledge concerning the
aforementioned variables for every region in the country.11 When possible, related
regional-scale information about extreme climate stressors is also provided to assist
highway planners in relating climate change impacts on infrastructure of concern. For
example, a given projection of changes in extreme events such as increases in heavy
precipitation or, conversely, drought, may stress a given infrastructure if the projected
conditions fall outside the design range. (The Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix
in Appendix C provides detailed information of the entire, and broader, set of studies
collected for this effort.) After discussion with climate experts, a set of inclusion criteria
was produced that determined which of the collected studies would be discussed in this
section (Section 2 and Appendix A provide further discussion of this step). As discussed
in Section 2, there is a large degree of uncertainty associated with climate projections
and, accordingly the projections are compiled from a number of climate models and
across emission scenarios to help bracket the range of plausible futures. These projections
are provided at varying degrees of uncertainty: “mean range,” the “likely range,” and the
“very likely” range (as discussed in Section 2). Temperature projections for all ranges
and regions are projected to rise. The plausible ranges for precipitation projections,
however, may extend from a reduction to an increase, which complicates the explanation
of regional precipitation patterns.
3.1 National projections
The following bullets provide a general overview of how temperature and precipitation
are projected to change for the United States (USGCRP 2009):
o Temperatures will continue to warm over the century with a projected average
increase by the end of the century of approximately 7 to 11° F under the high
emission scenario and 4 to 6.5°F under the low emission scenario.12
o For the contiguous United States, summer months are projected to experience
greater warming nationally compared with winter months. Extreme heat days
(defined as a daily maximum temperature that currently has a 5% chance of
occurring each year) will grow in number while extreme cold will decrease.
By the end of the century, extreme heat events are projected to have a 50%
chance of occurring each year.
11
It should be noted that the time ranges used in the tables and maps (and the USGCRP data) are slightly different than
those defined for this report. While the USGCRP data are representative of the data included under the time periods as
defined in this report, the time periods are not an exact match.
12
These ranges correspond to the mean averages as defined in this report, demonstrating differences between climate
model results based on a given emission scenario.

May 10, 2010

18

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

o Heavy downpours are projected to continue to increase while the lightest
precipitation decreases. By the end of the century, heavy downpours that have
a 5% chance of occurring in a given year are projected to have a 20 to 75%
chance of occurring in a given year. In addition, these types of precipitation
events are projected to be 10 to 25% heavier.
o In general, northern areas of the country are projected to become wetter while
southern areas, particularly the Southwest, will become drier.
o The jet stream over the United States is expected to continue to shift
northward. The jet stream steers and fuels mid-latitude storms (i.e.,
extratropical storms).
o Precipitation and humidity are projected to significantly increase in the
northern United States during winter and spring. This increase is in response
to warm, moist air from the south moving northward and replacing very cold,
dry air masses.
o Warming temperatures will increase evaporation as well as shift the rain/snow
line northward and to higher elevations so more precipitation will fall as rain
and less as snow.
3.1.1

Temperature

The likely range for global annual mean temperatures is projected to rise this century by
2 to 11.5°F by 2100; this range is based on the multi-model ensemble results across each
of the six SRES (USGCRP 2009; IPCC 2007a).13 This warming is not projected to be
evenly experienced around the globe. The greatest warming is projected to occur over
land and in most high northern latitudes (IPCC 2007b). A number of studies suggest that
irreversible, severe, and widespread impacts would be associated with a 2°F increase in
average global temperatures above 1980-1999 levels (USGCRP 2009).
Within the United States, the annual mean temperatures by the end of the century are
projected to warm by approximately 7 to 11°F under the higher A2 emissions scenario
and by approximately 4 to 6.5°F under the lower B1 emissions scenario (USGCRP 2009).
Summer months are projected to experience greater warming nationally compared with
winter months. Figure 4 illustrates the warming projected for mid-century and end-ofcentury under a higher (A2) and lower (B1) emissions scenarios for the continental
United States. In addition to increased mean summer temperatures, extreme heat days
will grow in number while the number of extreme cold days will decrease. By the end of
the century, extreme heat events that currently have a 5% chance of occurring each year
are projected to have a 50% chance of occurring each year under a moderate (A1B)
emission scenario (USGCRP 2009). This study further finds that in addition to more
13
The IPCC definition for “likely range” is -40% to +60% around the mean for each SRES. The full likely range
provided in this report is from the lowest point and highest point of all the likely ranges.

May 10, 2010

19

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

frequent occurrence of extreme heat waves, very hot days are projected to be about 10°F
hotter than they are today (USGCRP 2009).
2040-2069 (A2 Emission Scenario)

2070-2099 (A2 Emission Scenario)

2040-2069 (B1 Emission Scenario)

2070-2099 (B1 Emission Scenario)

Figure 4. Projected mean summer temperature change (°F) relative to 1971 to 2000 based on the
projections of statistically downscaled CMIP3 projections (see Appendix B for additional
temperature projections).14

3.1.2

Precipitation and Storm Events

Similar to temperature, projected precipitation is discussed in terms of seasonal averages
and extreme precipitation events (i.e., heavy downpours). Discussion of annual
precipitation, however, is limited in this report as it masks important variability, and
provides, in some cases, misleading information. Seasonal precipitation, on the other
hand, illustrates important trends while smoothing out the effects of heavy downpours. At
a daily scale, discussions of heavy precipitation events, generally defined as greater than
2 inches per day, provide information about isolated storm activity;15 however, no
processed information is readily available regarding other storm variables such as wind
strength and direction, nor the type of storm causing the event. The combination of
14

These figures were provided by personal communication with Katharine Hayhoe, Texas Tech University and
produced for USGCRP (2009).
15
It should be noted that 2 inches per day of precipitation may not be considered a threat to highway infrastructure;
however, a few studies cited in this report provide projections for the increased frequency of the 95th percentile of
precipitation.

May 10, 2010

20

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

projected seasonal precipitation and precipitation events provide compelling information
for system planning.
There is greater uncertainty associated with future changes in total precipitation
compared with temperature, because precipitation is more heavily influenced by both
small-scale phenomena and climate variability not captured by climate models. The
uncertainty represented in sections 3.3 through 3.11 through the provided likely and very
likely ranges encompasses the extent of plausible seasonal precipitation futures. The
USGCRP report (2009) states that the confidence of seasonal precipitation projections for
the United States is highest for winter and spring when precipitation is projected to
increase significantly for the northern region as the boundary between the southern warm
moist air and the northern cold air shifts northward. In addition, the northern regions are
projected to experience more precipitation falling as rain and less as snow. Conversely,
the southern regions are projected to experience significant reductions in precipitation
during the winter and spring months, particularly in the Southwest.
Extreme precipitation events are projected to increase in frequency and intensity, while
the amount that falls in light precipitation events is projected to decrease (USGCRP
2009). By the end of the century, heavy downpours that have a 5% chance of occurring in
a given year are projected to have a 7 to 25% chance of occurring in a given year,
depending on location (USGCRP 2009). In addition, heavy downpours that have a 5%
chance of occurring today are projected to be 10% heavier under the lower emission
scenario (B1) to 25% heavier under the higher emission scenario (A2) than it is now
(USGCRP 2009). An apparent paradox of increased moisture leading to both increased
drying conditions and increased heavy precipitation events is actually consistent with a
warmer atmosphere. As temperatures increase, the air can hold more water vapor,
allowing for increased amounts of evaporation. As more moisture enters the atmosphere,
rises, and cools aloft, the water vapor condenses back to a liquid, leading to a greater
amount of precipitation and increasing the energy associated with the storm (i.e., energy
is released when water vapor condenses to a liquid).
The United States is home to an impressive and diversified set of storms. In the Great
Plains, for example, convective storms can become so severe as to produce damaging
strong winds, large-sized hail, and tornadoes. In the Southeast, convective storms in
Florida produce a significantly high number of lightning strikes per year. In the
Northeast, particularly New England, nor’easters16 can produce intense and damaging
conditions. The Gulf states and the Southeast are vulnerable to tropical storms and
hurricanes. The Pacific coast experiences coastal storm and flooding events resulting
from the (in)famous Pineapple Express.17
The storm events currently experienced in the United States will likely evolve in response
to a changing climate. Though the current research is somewhat insufficient to draw
16
A type of extratropical storm that often initially develops as a cold-core low pressure system near the Gulf of
Mexico, gathering warmth and moisture, then travels northward, developing along the East Coast.
17
Pineapple Express occurs when humid subtropical air originating near Hawaii travels to California causing great
rains and floods.

May 10, 2010

21

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

conclusive projections, some broad relationships between the plausible future conditions
and the impacts these conditions may have on storm development have been discussed in
the CCSP’s (2008b) Weather and Climate Extremes in a Changing Climate report. This
discussion provides information for three types of storm events: convective storms (e.g.,
thunderstorms), extratropical storms (e.g., cyclonic storms forming along a mid-latitude
or high-latitude front), and tropical storms and hurricanes18 (e.g., organized
thunderstorms with cyclonic motion originating in the tropics).
Convective storms that are very localized may in fact increase in intensity in response to
the increase in atmospheric moisture, but decrease in duration or frequency. Projections
of changes in convective storms are unclear and may improve with the application of
nested models (regional models driven with GCM data that in turn feed information back
to the GCM model).
The physical mechanisms associated with extratropical storms are not yet entirely
understood even for present-day events; for example, major El Niños are understood to
influence storm behavior, but it is unclear how the natural variability of other large-scale
circulations affects these storms. To complicate matters, the characteristics such as sealevel pressure or strong surface winds used to define an extratropical storm differ
between climate studies. Even under these circumstances, some consistent changes across
studies of extratropical storms have been identified and suggest strong storms will be
more frequent, while the overall number of storms may decrease.
The recent scientific consensus on tropical cyclonic activity (i.e., tropical storms and
hurricanes, also known as typhoons in the Pacific, a cyclone in India, and a tropical
cyclone in Australia) describes the globally averaged intensity of tropical cyclones as
increasing by 2 to 11% by the end of the century (Knutson et al. 2010). On the other
hand, the globally averaged frequency of tropical cyclones is consistently projected by
modeling studies to decrease by 6 to 34%; however, results from higher resolution
models suggest increases in both the frequency of intense storm activity and the
precipitation rate within the storm center. It remains uncertain whether past changes in
tropical storm activity are influenced by natural variability or human activity (Knutson et
al. 2010; CCSP 2008b). It should be noted that precipitation presented by region in the
following subsections encompasses changes in precipitation associated with storm events.
3.1.3

Sea-Level Rise

Detailed national information is not uniformly available for sea-level rise projections.
Many of the state-of-the-science studies discussing sea-level rise provide only global
projections. A number of factors determine sea level changes at any given location. On
the global scale, the two most important factors are the expansion of ocean water as it
warms, and changes in the amount of water in the oceans due to the accumulation and
melting of ice sheets and glaciers and changes in the amount of water stored in

18
A tropical storm, by definition, becomes a hurricane when sustained winds reach 74 miles per hour. A tropical
depression, tropical storm, and a hurricane are all types of tropical cyclones.

May 10, 2010

22

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

reservoirs.19 These factors are generally considered in the production of global sea level
projections.
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment
Report (AR4), globally averaged sea level will rise by at least 5” by mid-century and 7”
to 23” by end-of-century (IPCC 2007a). Due to significant uncertainty associated with
future changes (e.g., melting rates) in the volume of glaciers and ice sheets at the time
that report was written, the IPCC essentially excluded major contributions from those
factors in its quantitative projections of sea level. Methods have been developed since the
publication of the IPCC AR4 results that attempt to address these issues, though
comparisons across recent studies can be difficult due to differing analytical approaches
and Earth system components that are included in each study. Table 3-1 describes the
global sea-level rise projections estimated by a number of recent studies for the end of the
century, providing a range of projected global sea-level rise of 7 to 79”. It is obvious that
there is great variability in the results, but note that most of the estimates are significantly
higher than those by the IPCC (2007a). The low end of the IPCC (2007a) projections is
considered very conservative, for example, and assumes negligible contribution from
melting of Greenland (DWR 2008). The continued rise in global sea level would greatly
affect coastal locations, particularly those already vulnerable to storm surge. The impact
of sea-level rise could be further exacerbated if coastal landforms that serve as stormsurge barriers are lost to extreme storm events such as a hurricane (USGCRP 2009).
Locally, other factors including vertical land motion (i.e., subsidence or uplift of land),
sedimentation and erosion, ocean circulation, gravitationally induced changes, and ocean
density (affected by regional changes in ocean salinity and ocean temperature) can also
play a role (with vertical land motion often dominant), thus complicating the work of
making projections at the sub-global level. Many of these factors are not well understood
and are the subject of current research efforts, so any regional or local projections made
at this time are fraught with uncertainty and should be considered carefully. It should be
noted that the term “relative sea-level rise” refers to the changes in land elevation with
respect to the level of the ocean determined by tide gauge measurements. Several
different modeling and analytical tools are used to predict changes in each of these
factors, which must be summed to determine local changes. Estimates of regional and
local relative sea-level rise have been collected and are discussed in sections 3.3 through
3.11, as available. It should be noted there is no study that considers all these factors, nor
is there a consistent methodology applied across these studies, so local projections should
be considered carefully.

19

“Steric” sea-level change refers to changes in sea level due to thermal expansion and salinity. “Eustatic” sea-level
rise refers to the changes in sea level in response to the melting of small glaciers and ice sheets. “Isostatic” sea-level
change is due to the shifting of land masses through adjustment to glacial loading or unloading, thermal buoyancy, or
plate tectonics. “Dynamic” sea-level change is due to changes in ocean circulation.

May 10, 2010

23

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Study
IPCC (2007a)

Projection,
2100
7” to 23”
(18cm to 59cm)

Methodology
Accounts for thermal expansion and conservative
estimates of changes in ice/snow melt.

Rahmstorf (2007)

20” to 55”
(0.5m to 1.4m)

Assumes a linear relationship between 20th century
observed temperature and sea-level rise to obtain a
proportionality constant of 3.4 mm/year per °C that
was used in Rahmstorf’s estimate of future sea level.
This projection relies upon the assumption that the
past statistical relationship remains constant in the
future and uses the global mean temperature
projections of the IPCC Third Assessment Report
(TAR) were used.

Grinsted et al. (2009)

35” to 51”
(0.9m to 1.3m)

Uses four inversion experiments to relate 2,000 years
of global temperatures to sea level and validated
model parameters with satellite altimetry. The global
mean temperature projections of 6 IPCC AR4
emission scenarios were used.

Rohling et al. (2008)

63”
(1.6m)

Uses paleoclimate data of the last interglacial period,
when global mean temperatures were at least 2°C
warmer than today and comparable to current
projected temperatures.

Pfeffer et al. (2008)

31” to 79”
(0.785m to
2.008m)

Uses thermal expansion projected by IPCC AR4
together with kinematic scenarios (e.g., varying the
velocities of outlet glaciers) to estimate the change in
surface mass balance of ice of Greenland and
Antarctica, and discharge of melting ice sheets and
glaciers.

Table 3-1: Global projections of sea-level rise compared with 1990 levels, except Rohling et al. (2008)
which describes projections per century. All results have been converted to inches, with study results
provided in parenthesis. These studies do not account for additional regional factors that may cause
regional sea-level change to be greater or less than the global average.

The IPCC factored in regional changes of ocean density and ocean circulation to estimate
local sea-level change. Figure 5 illustrates the variation in sea-level rise when these
factors are considered. Local sea-level changes will also be affected by other changes in
smaller scale circulation patterns, and vertical land movement, not included in this figure.

May 10, 2010

24

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Figure 5: The intent of this figure is to simply illustrate the potential variability of regional differences, and
should not be relied on for planning purposes. This figure shows projected local sea-level change (in meters)
due to ocean density and circulation change relative to the global average (i.e., positive values indicate greater
local sea-level change than the global average) during the 21st century, calculated as the difference between
averages for 2080 to 2099 and 1980 to 1999, as an ensemble mean over 16 AOGCMs forced with the SRES A1B
scenario. Stippling denotes regions where the magnitude of the multi-model ensemble mean divided by the
multi-model standard deviation exceeds 1.0 (IPCC 2007a). This figure does not include other local factors such
as land uplift or subsidence.

3.1.4

Local Applications of Regional Data

Most of the regional projections provided in sections 3.3 through 3.11 are averaged
across each region. Due to regional terrain or other phenomena, local variability within a
region may be large and may affect the robustness of using an averaged regional
projection. For example, Figure 6 demonstrates the large local variability in extreme heat
events20 projected to occur at the end of the century for the contiguous United States.21 In
this example, a regional average of the inter-mountain West would only be a very rough
approximation of the local conditions.

20
21

In this case, an extreme heat event is defined as a day where the maximum temperature exceeds 90°F.
Statistically downscaled data from the CMIP3 database are used for this figure.

May 10, 2010

25

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Figure 6: Extreme heat days (days where the maximum temperature exceeds 90°F) (USGCRP 2009).

The confidence of these projections also varies regionally. Figure 7 presents projected
changes in annual average precipitation for North America by 2080-2099 relative to
precipitation in the recent past (USGCRP 2009). The hatched areas on the maps
demonstrate projections where confidence is highest (that is, at least two out of three
models agree on the sign of the projected change in precipitation). According to Figure 7,
during the summer months, two large pockets of considerable reduction in precipitation
are evident within the continental United States, though there is only high confidence in
the Pacific Northwest drying. Overall, confidence is higher for the winter and spring
seasons where the northern regions are projected to experience significantly more
precipitation in response to the northward movement of the boundary between warm,
moist southern air and cold, continental northern air (USGCRP 2009).

May 10, 2010

26

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Figure 7: Projected future changes in precipitation by 2080-2099, relative to average seasonal
precipitation 1961-1979 under the A2 emission scenario and simulated by 15 climate models (CMIP3
data; USGCRP 2009). Hatched areas show areas with highest confidence in the projected change.

May 10, 2010

27

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.2 Regional Summaries
Sections 3.3 through 3.11 provide regional discussions of climate projections of
temperature and precipitation based largely on the results from the USGCRP (2009)
report (however, the USGCRP report focuses on impacts and does not provide this
information uniformly for all regions). The time ranges presented in the regional
summaries (i.e., “near-term”, “mid-century”, and “end-of-century”) are developed from
the collection of peer-reviewed studies in the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix.
As noted earlier, the USGCRP (2009) time ranges fall within these time ranges but are
not identical to them.
The USGCRP (2009) projections are summarized in the tables provided in each section
as well as illustratively with the maps in Appendix C (these maps also illustrate the
regional boundaries). The tables and maps provide the mean, likely range, and very likely
range of multi-model ensemble results for “low” and “high” emission scenarios (see
Section 2 for more information). If the collection of peer-reviewed studies within the
Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix provide additional information and meet the
criteria outlined in Figure 3, then the discussions of the USGCRP (2009) projections are
enhanced with these additional studies. In many cases, these additional studies provide
insight into changes of extreme events such as heat waves. It should be noted this report
does not attempt to judge these studies, beyond meeting the inclusion criteria, and merely
presents them.
The regional summaries provide climate projections of temperature and precipitation.
Table 3-2 and Table 3-3 provide the observed annual and seasonal means averaged over
the 1961 to 1979 time period.22 The means are provided as whole numbers to reflect the
lack of precision in calculating a regional mean, given insufficient station density
required to provide higher confidence. This information is provided for the continental
United States and was not readily available for the other U.S. regions. Table 3-2
illustrates the large 15°F difference in annual mean temperatures experienced across the
continental United States. There are large differences in seasonal mean temperatures
experienced within each region, with summers exhibiting the warmest average
temperatures and winters the coldest, with fall being slightly warmer than spring
months.23 The change in the observed annual mean temperature averaged over 1993 to
2008 relative to the 1961-1979 baseline is also provided in the continental regional
summaries (likewise for the observed annual mean precipitation).

22

This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center.
23
Seasons are defined as follows: Winter (December, January, February), Spring (March, April, May), Summer (June,
July, August), and Fall (September, October, November).

May 10, 2010

28

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Region
Southeast
Northeast
Midwest
Great
Plains
Southwest
Pacific
Northwest

Annual
63
47
47
52
55
47

Mean Temperature ( °F)
Winter
Spring
Summer
47
63
78
24
45
67
21
46
69
29
51
73
39
31

53
45

72
63

Fall
65
50
50
53
57
48

Table 3-2. 1961-1979 annual and seasonal mean temperature (°F) for the continental
U.S. regions.

Table 3-3 provides observed mean precipitation for each continental U.S. region.
Annually, the Southeast experiences the greatest amounts of precipitation. The Southwest
is particularly drier in comparison. Overall, winter tends to be a drier season for most
regions, with the other seasons somewhat comparable to each other. The Pacific
Northwest is an exception with winter as the wettest season and summer as the driest.
Region
Southeast
Northeast
Midwest
Great
Plains
Southwest
Pacific
Northwest

Annual
50
41
34
21
15
28

Mean Precipitation (inches)
Winter
Spring
Summer
11
12
15
9
10
11
5
10
11
2
6
7
5
11

3
6

3
3

Fall
11
10
8
5
4
7

Table 3-3. 1961-1979 annual and seasonal precipitation mean (inches) for the
continental U.S. regions. The total seasonal amounts may not equal the annual
amount provided due to rounding.

Sections 3.3 through 3.11 also provide regional summaries of studies investigating local
sea-level rise. In addition, a comparison of historical trends of the region24 to the global
observed trend of sea-level rise of 1.8 ± 0.5 mm yr–1 from 1961 to 2003 (IPCC 2007a) is
provided to illustrate past regional difference from the global average sea-level rise.

24

The National Water Level Observation provides historic sea level trends for 128 stations along the U.S. coastline.
These measurements are provided by NOAA and include stations that provide sea level trends over a 30 year span or
longer (NOAA 2010).

May 10, 2010

29

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.3 Northeast
3.3.1

Temperature
3.3.1.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Within the next several decades, the Northeast is likely to experience an increase in
annual mean temperature of approximately 2.5°F with a likely range of 1.9 to 3.2°F
(USGCRP 2009; NECIA 2006; Frumhoff et al. 2007). This projected warming is greater
than the 1.5°F increase experienced over the 1993-2008 time period when compared to a
1961-1979 baseline (USGCRP 2009).25 Winter temperatures over the same time period
are projected to increase even more, by approximately 3.0°F with a likely range of 1.8 to
3.8°F. Near-term summer and spring temperature increases are projected to be slightly
greater than 2.0°F (USGCRP 2009). These results are consistent with projections for
Pennsylvania (NECIA 2008), while the NECIA (2006) report, which uses similar but not
identical emission scenarios (the high emission scenario is A1Fi), projects similar mean
temperature increases for annual and summer. However, NECIA (2006) projects that the
winter mean temperature is projected to experience a slightly higher increase of 3.3 to
3.4°F with a likely range of 2.5 to 4.0°F.26 These temperature increases could lead to
further reduction in the thickness and duration of winter ice on lakes and rivers, more
precipitation falling as rain rather than snow, and earlier spring snowmelt affecting the
timing of peak river flows.
The number of extreme heat days is also projected to increase across a number of
Northeast cities. Buffalo, NY is projected to experience the smallest increase (of 2 to 5
days per year) and Philadelphia, PA and Pittsburgh, PA are projected to experience the
greatest increase (9 to 11 days per year) (NECIA 2006).27 Boston, MA is projected to
increase experience 4 to 8 additional days per year above 90°F (USGCRP 2009; Hayhoe
et al 2008).28 Other cities projected to experience 5 to 10 more days per year of extreme
heat include Concord, NH; Manchester, NH; Hartford, CT; and New York City, NY
(NECIA 2006). Areas of Pennsylvania could experience more than a doubling of the
frequency of extreme heat days (NECIA 2008).

25
This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center.
26
The NECIA (2008) and NECIA (2006) study uses statistical downscaling of the results of three climate models:
CM2.1, HadCM3, and PCM, relative to a 1961-1990 baseline.
27
Extreme heat day is defined by this study as the number of days with temperature above 90°F.
28
Hayhoe et al. (2008) provides results based on the A1Fi (high) and B1 (low) emission scenarios; the climate model
results of CM2.1, HadCM3, and PCM are statistically downscaled.

May 10, 2010

30

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.3.1.2 Mid­century (2040 – 2070)
By mid-century, the increase in annual mean temperature for the Northeast is projected to
be between 3.8 to 4.8°F with a likely range of 2.8 to 5.8°F (USGCRP 2009). This range
is also representative of the increase projected for the summer and fall seasons (USGCRP
2009). The Northeast is projected to experience greater warming in the winter, with
temperature increases projected of 4.0 to 5.4°F with a likely range of 2.9 to 6.6°F
(USGCRP 2009). The temperature increase during the spring months is slightly lower
than the annual average at 3.5 to 4.1°F, with a likely range of 2.2 to 5.5°F (USGCRP
2009). The frequency of extreme heat days in Northeast cities is also likely to rise, with
Boston, for example, seeing an additional 12 to 29 days over 90°F (USGCRP 2009).
Seven individual Northeast cities examined are projected to experience an increase of
approximately 8 to 39 extreme heat days per year (NECIA 2006). The northern cities
tend to be represented by the low end of this range and the southern cities by the high
end.
Northeast (∆ Temperature)
Mean
Annual
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(°F)
2.5
1.9 – 3.2
1.3 – 3.8
2.8 – 3.0
1.8 – 3.8
0.9 – 4.7
2.0 – 2.2
1.2 – 3.0
0.4 - 3.8
2.3 – 2.5
1.8 – 3.1
1.3 – 3.7
2.5 – 2.7
1.9 – 3.3
1.2 – 3.9

Mid-century
(°F)
3.8 – 4.8
2.8 – 5.8
1.9 – 6.8
4.0 – 5.4
2.9 – 6.6
1.8 – 7.9
3.5 – 4.1
2.2 – 5.5
0.9 – 6.8
3.7 – 4.8
2.8 – 5.8
1.8 – 6.9
3.9 – 4.8
2.8 – 5.6
1.8 – 6.5

End-ofcentury (°F)
5.4 – 9.0
4.2 – 10.8
3.0 – 12.5
5.9 – 9.3
4.7 – 11.0
3.5 – 12.8
5.0 – 8.1
3.6 – 10.0
2.3 – 11.9
5.2 – 9.4
3.9 – 11.8
2.7 – 14.1
5.3 – 9.1
3.9 – 10.8
2.5 – 12.8

Table 3-4: Annual and seasonal temperature changes for the Northeast region over
the near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098)
relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions
scenarios. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

3.3.1.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, the warming in the Northeast is likely to be quite significant. The
projected annual mean increase is expected to be between 5.4 to 9.0°F, with a likely
range of 4.2 to 10.8°F. The winter, summer, and fall changes are all relatively similar to
the annual mean (USGCRP 2009). The spring months are projected to experience the
lowest mean increase of all the seasons, with a mean warming of 5.0 to 8.1°F and a likely
range of 3.6 to 10.0°F (USGCRP 2009). Though the NECIA (2006) study estimates
similar projections, the Pennsylvania study suggests greater increases, with winter
May 10, 2010

31

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

temperature projected to rise 8°F and summer temperatures projected to rise 11°F. Not
only are temperatures projected to change, but also the duration of each season. Overall,
under a “business as usual” scenario (A2), winters in the Northeast are projected to
shorten, with the length of the winter snow season cut in half for the northern half of the
region, including New York, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine, and reduced to a few
weeks in the southern half (USGCRP 2009). Summer-like temperatures, on the other
hand, are projected to persist for 6 weeks longer than usual (USGCRP 2009).
Extreme heat events29 that currently have a 5% chance of occurring each year are
projected to have a 50% chance of occurring each year by late century (USGCRP 2009).
Many Northeast cities are projected to experience approximately 13 to 63 more days
reaching 90°F by the end of this century compared with today’s observations (NECIA
2006). The northern cities in the region tend to fall in the low end of this range and the
southern cities in the high end.
3.3.2

Precipitation and Storm Events
3.3.2.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Current observations averaged over the 1993 to 2008 time period suggest that annual
mean precipitation has increased by 7% relative to the 1961-1979 time period (USGCRP
2009).30 Within the next several decades, the Northeast is likely to experience wetter
winter months with an average precipitation increase of about 6% and a likely range of
+2 to +11% (USGCRP 2009). The fall months have the lowest mean projected increases
of 1 to 2% with a likely range of -4 to +6% (USGCRP 2009). The spring and summer are
projected to experience similar near-term increases in precipitation. Spring precipitation
is projected to increase by 3% with a likely range of -2 to +7%, and the summer months
projected to increase by 2% with a likely range of -1 to +6% (USGCRP 2009).
Understanding how precipitation intensity, duration, and frequency may change is
important for planning purposes. Individual precipitation events are likely to increase in
intensity by approximately 7% (NECIA 2006), so more rain may be arriving in brief
pulses. Specifically, the maximum amount of precipitation to fall during any five-day
period in a year is projected to increase by 9 to 12% (NECIA 2006).

29

Extreme heat event is based on apparent temperature, a combination of high temperature and humidity.
This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center. Annual precipitation provides some indication of regional change, but is not an adequate indicator when
determining impacts on transportation as it masks much of the seasonal variability.
30

May 10, 2010

32

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Northeast (∆ Precipitation)
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(%)
6
2 – 11
(2) – 15
3
(2) – 7
(7) – 12
2
(1) – 6
(5) – 10
1–2
(4) – 6
(10) – 11

Mid-century
(%)
8 – 11
2 – 18
(4) – 26
5–6
0 – 12
(5) – 17
1–2
(6) – 7
(12) – 14
3
(3) – 9
(9) – 16

End-ofcentury (%)
11 – 17
4 – 27
(4) – 36
9 – 11
1 – 21
(9) – 31
(1) – 2
(12) – 11
(24) – 23
3–4
(5) – 13
(15) – 23

Table 3-5: Seasonal precipitation percent changes for the Northeast region over the
near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098)
relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions
scenarios. Values in parentheses are negative values and represent decreases in
precipitation. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

3.3.2.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
Overall, precipitation in the Northeast is projected to increase by mid-century across all
seasons, with the greatest change again projected to occur in the winter months. By midcentury, the average winter precipitation increase projected for the Northeast is 8% and
11%, with a likely range of +2 to +18% (USGCRP 2009). Another study that used a
higher bounding emission scenario (A1Fi) reported an even greater increase in winter
precipitation of 11 to 16% for most of this region including New England, New York,
New Jersey, and Pennsylvania (NECIA 2006). Spring and fall precipitation are projected
to increase more moderately at 5 to 6% with a likely range of +0 to +12%, and 3% with a
likely range of -3 to +9%, respectively. Summer precipitation is projected to increase the
least of all the seasons, with an increase of only 1 to 2% and a likely range of -6 to +7%
(USGCRP 2009).
By mid-century, this region is projected to experience more than an 8% increase in the
average amount of rain that falls on any given rainy day, with the duration of extreme
rain events31 expected to increase by 1 to 1.5 days. In addition, the maximum amount of
precipitation falling during any five-day period in a year is projected to increase by 8 to
13% (NECIA 2006). These increases in heavy rainfall events will increase the risk of
floods for the Northeast region. NECIA (2006) suggests little change in the frequency of
winter-time storms for the East Coast. However, under the “high-end” scenario (A1Fi),
between 5 and 15% of these storms (an additional 1 storm per year) will move northward
during late winter (Jan, Feb, March), affecting the Northeast. No change is projected for

31

Extreme rain event is defined as more than 2 inches per day.

May 10, 2010

33

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

the “low-end” (B1) scenario. In addition, the impact of a higher sea level will increase the
likelihood of storm damage to coastal locations.
3.3.2.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, the Northeast is projected to experience the greatest seasonal
increase in precipitation during the winter months. This increase is projected to be 11 to
17%, with a likely range of +4 to +27%. Summer will continue to be the least affected of
the seasons, with average increases in total seasonal precipitation projected to be 2%
under the high emissions scenario and -1% under the low emissions scenario (USGCRP
2009). By the end of the century, the intensity of any particular precipitation event is
projected to increase, on average, by 12 to 13% (NECIA 2006). Additionally, the number
of days in a given year with precipitation events of greater than two inches per day is
projected to slightly increase by an additional 1.25 to 1.75 days per year (NECIA 2006).
As air temperatures rise, the Northeast can expect a continuation of recent trends in the
type of precipitation experienced during winter: less snow and more rain (NECIA 2006).
Most of the Northeast could lose approximately four to 15 snow-covered days per winter
month, with a 25 to 50% reduction in the length of the snow season with the onset of an
earlier spring (NECIA 2006).
3.3.3

Sea-Level Rise

Global sea-level rise (SLR) of 7 to 79” (18cm to 2.0m) is projected for 2100 (see section
3.1.3. for discussion on global and local sea-level rise). SLR at the local/regional level is
influenced by multiple factors, including sedimentation and erosion, ocean circulation,
gravitationally induced changes, ocean density (affected by regional changes in ocean
salinity and ocean temperature), and vertical motion of the land (subsidence or uplift). In
the 20th century, the relative sea-level rise for the Northeast was greater than the level of
global sea-level rise.32
The following discussion describes studies providing local sea-level rise projections for
the Northeast. As noted in section 3.1.3 above, making local or regional projections is
highly uncertain, given the incomplete understanding of some of the effects that can take
place at the local level. There is no study that considers all these factors, nor is there a
consistent methodology for projecting sea-level rise applied across these studies.
Therefore, local SLR projections, while informative, should be considered carefully, and
with a clear understanding of what factors each study includes or excludes.
Yin et al. (2009) projects that the Northeast coastline could experience a sea-level rise
much greater than the global average, due to changes in ocean circulation.33 Yin et al.
32

The National Water Level Observation provides historic sea level trends for 28 stations along the Northeast U.S.
coastline. These measurements are provided by NOAA and include stations that provide sea level trends over a 30-year
span or, in most cases, much longer (NOAA 2010). The Northeast trend is compared against the global observed trend
of sea-level rise of 1.8 ± 0.5 mm yr–1 from 1961 to 2003 (IPCC 2007a).
33
Dynamic sea-level rise at New York City at end-of-century (i.e., 2091-2100) is projected using the GFDL CM2.1
climate model under B1 (low emission) and A2 (high emission) scenarios relative to 1981-2000 mean sea level (Yin et
al. 2009).

May 10, 2010

34

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

(2009) estimate that these ocean circulation changes will increase sea level in New York
City, NY by 5.9 to 8.3” (15cm to 21cm) above what would be expected from global sealevel rise and local vertical land motions alone (this study does not consider other factors
such as erosion or sedimentation). Similar amplifications are projected for Washington,
DC and Boston, MA.
Sea-level rise exacerbates the impacts of strong storm events. Kirshen et al.’s (2008)
analysis indicates that the storm surge elevations across the Northeast associated with a
storm that has a 1% chance of occurring in 2005 are projected to increase substantially
due to sea-level rise, even as storm intensity remains unchanged.34 Using the lower
emission scenario (B1) as the lower bound and the Rahmstorf (2007) study as the upper
bound, Kirshen et al. made the following projections for sea-level-rise-induced increases
in storm surge elevation by 2100: Atlantic City, NJ is projected to experience the greatest
increase of 46.9 to 74.4” (119cm to 189cm), and Woods Hole, MA is projected to
experience the least at 13.2 to 28.8” (33.5 to 73.2cm). New York City, NY; Boston, MA;
and New London, CT fell within the range between Woods Hole, MA and Atlantic City,
NJ. This study further suggests that a flood that has a 1% chance of occurring in New
York City in 2005 has about a 5% (low emission scenario) to a 50% chance (high
emission scenario) of occurring in a year by 2100. Kirshen et al. (2008) did not consider
other regional sea-level rise effects, such as ocean circulation or wind patterns, changes
in the relative elevation of coastal land (i.e., caused by subsidence or uplift), or local
changes in ocean density.

34
Storm surge elevation along the Northeast coast at end-of-century (i.e., 2100) is projected using a long-term average
of highest daily tides at each location, a mid-range of global sea-level rise predicted by IPCC under the B1 (low
emissions) scenario, and high-range associated with the mid-range projection provided by Rahmstorf (2007), relative to
the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) in 1988. Tide measurements, due to the location of the tide gauges,
measure both storm surge and increased river flow during coastal flooding events. (Kirshen et al. 2008).

May 10, 2010

35

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.4 Southeast
3.4.1

Temperature
3.4.1.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Within the next two decades, the annual mean temperature in the Southeast is projected
to increase by approximately 2°F with a likely range of 1.7 to 2.7°F (USGCRP 2009;
CCSP 2008a). This projected warming is greater than the 1.2°F increase already
experienced over the 1993 to 2008 time period compared with a 1961-1979 baseline
(USGCRP 2009).35 Projected seasonal temperatures exhibit similar increases, with both
summer and fall temperatures projected to increase by slightly greater amounts, and the
winter and spring by slightly less (USGCRP 2009). Not only are summer temperatures
projected to increase, but so are the number of extreme heat days.36 By 2030, Houston,
TX is projected under a higher emission scenario (A2) to experience a 25 to 75%
probability of having 4 to 11 days above 100°F (in 2007, the probability of 4 days at
100°F was over 45% and less than 10% for 11 days) (CCSP 2008a).37
3.4.1.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
By mid-century, the increase in annual mean temperature is projected to be
approximately 3.2 to 4.0°F, with a likely range of 2.4 to 4.8°F (USGCRP 2009). The
projections for temperature increases in spring and fall are relatively similar to the annual
mean. The mean temperature for the summer months is projected to be the highest mean
increase of all the seasons, with a mean warming of 3.5 to 4.5°F and a likely range of 2.5
to 5.6°F. The mean temperature for the winter months is projected to be slightly lower
than the annual mean, with a mean warming of 2.7 to 3.6°F and a likely range of 1.6 to
4.5°F (USGCRP 2009). Extreme heat days are projected to continue to increase. By
2060, Houston, TX is projected to have a 25 to 75% probability of having 14 to more
than 20 days above 100°F per year (in 2007, the probability of 14 days or more at 100°F
was less than 5%) (CCSP 2008a).
3.4.1.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, annual mean temperature in the Southeast region is projected to
increase by 4.5 to 7.8°F, with a likely range of 3.4 to 9.4°F (USGCRP 2009). The
projections for the spring months are similar to the annual mean. The Southeast is
projected to experience the smallest warming in winter, with temperature increases of 4.0
to 6.3°F and a likely range of 2.8 to 7.9°F (USGCRP 2009). The summer months are
projected to experience the greatest warming of all the seasons, with temperature
35

This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center.
36
Extreme heat day defined here as a daily maximum temperature above 100°F.
37
CCSP 2008a study draws from results of 17 climate models represented in the CMIP3 dataset for IPCC AR4.

May 10, 2010

36

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

increases of 4.8 to 9.0°F and a likely range of 3.5 to 11.2°F (USGCRP 2009). The fall
months are projected to display a slightly higher mean than the annual average, with
mean increases projected to be 4.7 to 8.3°F and a likely range of 3.5 to 9.8°F (USGCRP
2009).

Southeast
(∆ Temperature)
Mean
Annual
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(°F)
2.1 – 2.2
1.7 – 2.7
1.2 – 3.2
1.9 – 2.1
1.1 – 2.8
0.3 – 3.6
1.8 – 2.0
1.3 – 2.7
0.6 – 3.3
2.3 – 2.4
1.5 – 3.0
0.7 – 3.8
2.3
1.8 – 2.9
1.2 – 3.4

Mid-century
(°F)
3.2 – 4.0
2.4 – 4.8
1.6 – 5.5
2.7 – 3.6
1.6 – 4.5
0.5 – 5.4
3.1 – 3.8
2.2 – 4.6
1.3 – 5.4
3.5 – 4.5
2.5 – 5.6
1.6 – 6.7
3.4 – 4.3
2.6 – 4.9
1.8 – 5.6

End-ofcentury (°F)
4.5 – 7.8
3.4 – 9.4
2.4 – 10.9
4.0 – 6.3
2.8 – 7.9
1.7 – 9.4
4.4 – 7.5
3.2 – 9.1
2.0 – 10.7
4.8 – 9.0
3.5 – 11.2
2.3 – 13.5
4.7 – 8.3
3.5 – 9.8
2.4 – 11.3

Table 3-6: Annual and seasonal temperature changes for the Southeast region over
the near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098)
relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions
scenarios. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

By the end-of-century, studies agree that the Southeast region will experience more
extreme heat events. Between 2080 and 2100, extreme heat events (a combination of
temperature and humidity) that currently have a 5% chance occurring for a given year are
projected to have about a 50 to 100% chance of occurring each year (USGCRP 2009). By
2099, Houston, TX is projected to experience a near 100% probability of having more
than 20 days above 100°F per year (current probability of 20 days at or above 100°F is
near 0%) (CCSP 2008a). Similarly, the Appalachian Mountain region is predicted to
experience approximately three times more “high temperature” days38 each year by the
end-of-century under a higher emission scenario (A2). (Diffenbaugh et al 2005).
3.4.2

Precipitation and Storm Events
3.4.2.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

38

High temperature days are defined as defined as being at or above the 95th percentile among current daily
temperature records. This study uses RegCM3 and a baseline period of 1961-1985.

May 10, 2010

37

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Current observations averaged over 1993 to 2008 suggest annual mean precipitation has
decreased by 1% relative to 1961-1979 (USGCRP 2009).39 In the near-term, mean
precipitation in the Southeast does not exhibit a strong trend, but is generally projected to
decrease in the summer and spring and increase in the fall. There is considerable
disagreement between various climate models on the magnitude and, in some cases,
direction of changes in precipitation in each time period.
Over the next two decades, the greatest increases in mean precipitation are projected to
occur during the fall months and the greatest decreases during the spring months. The fall
months are projected to increase by 1 to 2% with a likely range of -4 to +7%, while the
spring months are projected to decrease by 0 to 2% with a likely range of -7 to +4%
(USGCRP 2009). The winter and summer months exhibit very little change with a likely
range of -6 to +5% and -8 to +8%, respectively (USGCRP 2009). In addition, if current
observational trends continue, the spacing between precipitation events could continue to
increase, leading to continued periods of drought (USGCRP 2009).
Southeast
(∆ Precipitation)
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(%)
(1) – 0
(6) – 5
(11) – 9
(2) – 0
(7) – 4
(12) – 8
0
(8) – 8
(16) – 16
1–2
(4) – 7
(10) – 12

Mid-century
(%)
(2) – 1
(8) – 9
(15) – 16
1–2
(5) – 8
(11) – 14
(2) – 0
(14) – 10
(26) – 23
(2) – (1)
(9) – 5
(16) – 12

End-ofcentury (%)
(3) – 0
(15) – 10
(28) – 22
(7) – 1
(20) – 7
(32) – 18
(8) – 0
(29) – 14
(50) – 35
2–3
(9) – 16
(21) – 28

Table 3-7: Seasonal precipitation percent changes for the Southeast region over the
near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098)
relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions
scenarios. Values in parentheses are negative values and represent decreases in
precipitation. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

3.4.2.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
By mid-century, the greatest seasonal mean change in precipitation between emission
scenario results is projected to occur during the winter months, with the mean ranging
from an increase of 1% to a decrease of 2%, and a likely range of -8 to +9% (USGCRP
2009). The summer months exhibit a reduction in mean precipitation between 0 to 2%
39

This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center. Annual precipitation provides some indication of regional change but is not an adequate indicator when
determining impacts on transportation as it masks much of the seasonal variability.

May 10, 2010

38

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

with a likely range of -14 to +10%. The fall months are projected to sustain a reduction in
mean precipitation of 1 to 2% with a likely range of -9 to +5% (USGCRP 2009). Spring
is the only season projected to have an increase in precipitation with a mean change of 1
to 2%, and a likely range of -5 to +8% (USGCRP 2009).
3.4.2.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
At the end-of-century, the largest seasonal mean decrease of precipitation is projected to
occur during the summer season, with a mean decrease of about 0 to 8% and a likely
range of -29 to +14% (USGCRP 2009). The spring season mean change ranges varies
from 1 to -7% with a likely range of -20 to +7% (USGCRP 2009). The mean change for
the winter season varies between 0% to a reduction of 3% with a likely range of -15 to
+10% (USGCRP 2009). In contrast, the mean fall precipitation is projected to increase
from 2 to 3% with a likely range -9 to +16% (USGCRP 2009). The greatest degree of
certainty is that precipitation in the fall will increase, while the other precipitation effects
are not as certain (USGCRP 2009). Diffenbaugh et al. (2005) found that the mid-Atlantic
coast would be up to 40% rainier at the end-of-century overall.
By late century, the Gulf Coast region from Galveston, TX to Mobile Bay, AL is
projected to experience an intensity increase of 5% for category 1 storms and 20% for
category 4 storms (CCSP 2008a). This projection assumes that changes in hurricane
intensity are directly related to increases in projected sea surface temperatures. For
example, sea surface temperatures in the Atlantic hurricane formation region are
projected to increase from 3 to 7°F, leading to increased tropical storms (CCSP 2008a).
This does not take into account changes in other contributors to tropical storm
development (e.g., vertical wind shear and vertical temperature structure), and hence,
higher sea surface temperatures do not necessarily translate to an increased storm
intensity.
3.4.3

Sea-Level Rise

Global sea-level rise (SLR) of 7 to 79” (18 cm to 2.0 m) is projected for 2100 (see section
3.1.3. for discussion on global and local sea-level rise). SLR at the local/regional level is
influenced by multiple factors, including: sedimentation and erosion, ocean circulation,
gravitationally induced changes, ocean density (affected by regional changes in ocean
salinity and ocean temperature), and vertical motion of the land (subsidence/uplift).
Using historical records, the relative sea-level rise for the Southeast was greater than the
level of global sea-level rise.40 This finding is consistent with the CCSP (2008a) study,
which provides estimates of subsidence rates along the Gulf Coast that would lead to
higher sea levels than the global average: Louisiana-Texas Chenier Plain at 0.19 in/yr

40

The National Water Level Observation provides historic sea level trends for 37 stations along the Southeast U.S.
coastline. These measurements are provided by NOAA and include stations that provide sea level trends over a 30-year
span or, in most cases, much longer (NOAA 2010). The Southeast trend is compared against the global observed trend
of sea-level rise of 1.8 ± 0.5 mm yr–1 from 1961 to 2003 (IPCC 2007a).

May 10, 2010

39

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

(4.7 mm/yr), Louisiana Deltaic Plain at 0.32 in/yr (8.05 mm/yr), and MississippiAlabama Sound at 0.01 in/yr (0.34 mm/yr).

May 10, 2010

40

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.5 Midwest
3.5.1

Temperature
3.5.1.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Within the next two decades, the annual mean temperature in the Midwest is projected to
increase by approximately 2.7°F with a likely range of 1.9 to 3.3°F (USGCRP 2009;
Union of Concerned Scientists 2009). This projected warming is greater than the 1.4°F
increase already experienced over the 1993 to 2008 time period compared with a 19611979 baseline (USGCRP 2009).41 Projected summer, fall, and winter seasonal
temperatures are expected to exhibit similar increases compared with the annual mean
(USGCRP 2009). Spring seasonal temperatures are projected to increase slightly less than
the annual mean at 2.0 to 2.4°F, with a likely range of 1.2 to 3.3°F (USGCRP 2009).
These projections are similar to those provided for Chicago, IL, where temperature
increases of approximately 1.8 to 3.6°F (1 to 2°C) are projected (Hellmann et al 2007).42
Observed increases in the winter season have extended the frost-free (or growing) season
by a week (USGCRP 2009); the growing season is expected to continue to lengthen as
temperatures continue to warm in spring and fall. In addition, higher temperatures lead to
increased evaporation, reducing water levels in the Great Lakes (USGCRP 2009).
3.5.1.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
By mid-century, the annual mean temperature increase is projected to be approximately
4.0 to 5.0°F, with a likely range of 3.0 to 6.0°F (USGCRP 2009). The projections for
summer, fall, and winter temperatures are again similar to the annual mean. However, the
temperature increase for the spring months is projected to be less, with a seasonal average
of 3.6 to 4.2°F and a likely range of 2.2 to 5.6°F (USGCRP 2009). Chicago may
experience a higher annual temperature than that suggested for the region, with an
increase between 2.7 to 9°F (1.5 to 5°C) by 2070 (Hellmann et al 2007).
3.5.1.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, annual mean temperature is projected to increase by
approximately 5.6 to 9.6°F in the Midwest with a likely range of 4.3 to 11.7°F (USGCRP
2009). The projections for fall and winter temperatures continue to be similar to the
annual mean. However, the spring months are projected to experience a smaller
temperature increase of 5.1 to 8.4°F, with a likely range of 3.5 to 10.6°F (USGCRP
2009). The summer months display a higher annual mean temperature increase of 5.6 to
10.8°F, with a likely range of 4.2 to 14.2°F (USGCRP 2009). Annual mean temperature
41

This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of National Climatic Data Center.
Hellman et al (2007) study projects changes in annual average temperature relative to 1961-1990 drawing from 21
IPCC AR4 models using a higher (A1Fi) emission scenario and lower (B1) emission scenario. The projection provided
is for 2010-2039.
42

May 10, 2010

41

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

increases in Chicago are projected to be similar to these regional increases (Hellmann et
al 2007). However, one set of studies found even higher annual mean temperature
increases ranging between 6 and 14°F in Minnesota, Missouri, Indiana, Wisconsin, and
Ohio, associated with a lower (B1) emission scenario and a higher (A1Fi) emission
scenario (Union of Concerned Scientists 2009a-e).43

Midwest
(∆ Temperature)
Mean
Annual
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(°F)
2.6 – 2.7
1.9 – 3.3
1.3 – 3.9
2.6 – 3.0
1.6 – 4.0
0.6 – 4.9
2.0 – 2.4
1.2 – 3.3
0.4 – 4.1
2.6 – 2.8
1.9 – 3.8
1.0 – 4.7
2.6 – 2.7
2.0 – 3.4
1.3 – 4.1

Mid-century
(°F)
4.0 – 5.0
3.0 – 6.0
1.9 – 7.0
4.1 – 5.3
2.9 – 6.6
1.7 – 7.9
3.6 – 4.2
2.2 – 5.6
0.8 – 7.0
4.1 – 5.3
2.8 – 6.8
1.5 – 8.3
4.0 – 4.9
2.9 – 5.8
1.7 – 6.7

End-ofcentury (°F)
5.6 – 9.6
4.3 – 11.7
3.0 – 13.8
6.0 – 9.4
4.6 – 11.5
3.3 – 13.5
5.1 – 8.4
3.5 – 10.6
1.9 – 12.9
5.6 – 10.8
4.2 – 14.2
2.7 – 17.5
5.5 – 9.6
4.1 – 11.6
2.7 – 13.6

Table 3-8: Annual and seasonal temperature changes for the Midwest region over
the near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098)
relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions
scenarios. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

By the end-of-century, heat waves in the Midwest are expected to become longer, hotter,
and more frequent (Ebi and Meehl 2007; USGCRP 2009). By 2100, under a higher (A2)
emission scenario, a heat event that currently has a 5% chance of occurring for a given
year is projected to have about a 50 to 100% chance of occurring for a given year
(USGCRP 2009). In Chicago and Cincinnati, the frequency of heat waves is expected to
increase 24% and 50% respectively under a business as usual scenario (Ebi and Meehl
2007).44 The average duration of these heat waves is also projected to increase by
approximately 20% in both cities. Similarly, under a high (A1Fi) emission scenario, cities
across the Midwest, including Des Moines, Cincinnati, and Indianapolis, are projected to
experience between 65 and 85 days over 90°F each summer by the end-of-century

43

This study provides projections based on statistically downscaled data of three climate models (CM2.1, HadCM3,
and PCM) which represent the spectrum of climate sensitivity; the baseline period is 1961-1990.
44
This study defines a heat wave as the maximum temp exceeding the 97.5 percentile for at least 3 days, the average
minimum temperature above the 97.5 percentile for at least 3 days, and the maximum temperature above the 81st
percentile for the entire period. This study used a ‘business as usual’ scenario and 1961-1990 as relative baseline.

May 10, 2010

42

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

compared with approximately 10 to 20 days averaged over 1961-1990 (Union of
Concerned Scientists 2009a).45

Figure 8: Average number of freezing days per year in the Midwest (defined as days the minimum
temperature is below 32°F). The illustrations are 16 multi-model ensemble averages for years 19611979, 2040-2059, and 2080-2099 for SRES A2. (USGCRP 2009)

Figure 8 illustrates the reduction of freezing days projected for the Midwest; this is
particularly evident for the northern areas. For example, southern Minnesota experienced
about 170 freezing days in 1961-1979 and is projected to experience about 110 freezing
days in 2080-2099 under the A2 scenario.
3.5.2

Precipitation and Storm Events
3.5.2.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Current observations averaged over 1993 to 2008 suggest that annual mean precipitation
has increased by 5% relative to the 1961-1979 time period (USGCRP 2009).46 By far the
largest seasonal increase in precipitation is projected to occur during the winter months,
with an average increase of 6 to 7% and a likely range of +2 to +12% (USGCRP 2009).
Annual mean precipitation in Chicago is projected to experience precipitation increases
in line with the regional estimates (Hellmann et al. 2007). Heavy precipitation events are
also projected to increase during this time, with the frequency of spring rainfall heavy
downpours increasing by almost 15% in Missouri, Illinois, and Minnesota under a high
emission scenario (A1Fi) compared with 1961-1990 (Union of Concerned Scientists
2009a).47 In the next two decades, heavy rains are projected to increase by 66% in St.
Paul, 35% in Indianapolis, and 20% in Chicago (Union of Concerned Scientists 2009).
These increases are expected to increase flooding and overload many drainage systems
(USGCRP 2009).

45

This study uses three state-of-the-art global climate models (CM 2.1, HadCM3, and PCM) that together adequately
capture climate sensitivity.
46
This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center. Annual precipitation provides some indication of regional change but is not an adequate indicator when
determining impacts on transportation as it masks much of the seasonal variability.
47
This study defines a heavy downpour as more than 2” of rain per day.

May 10, 2010

43

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.5.2.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
Precipitation increases are projected to occur in the winter and spring months. Winter
precipitation, for example, is projected to increase by 8 to 9% with a likely range of +1 to
+15% (USGCRP 2009). Precipitation is projected to decrease by an average of 1 to 4% in
the summer months with a likely range of -15 to +8% (USGCRP 2009). However, studies
disagree on the magnitude of predicted changes in precipitation. Precipitation changes in
Chicago are projected to be between -2 and 10% by 2070 (Hellmann et al 2007).

Midwest
(∆ Precipitation)
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(%)
6–7
2 – 12
(3) – 16
3–4
(1) – 8
(6) – 12
(1)
(7) – 6
(14) – 13
1
(5) – 7
(11) – 13

Mid-century
(%)
8–9
1 – 15
(6) – 21
7–9
3 – 13
(1) – 18
(4) – (1)
(15) – 8
(26) – 19
1–3
(6) – 11
(14) – 18

End-ofcentury (%)
10 – 14
3 – 22
(3) – 30
10 – 14
2 – 25
(9) – 36
(9) – (2)
(31) – 14
(53) – 36
2–3
(10) – 17
(23) – 30

Table 3-9: Seasonal precipitation percent changes for the Midwest region over the
near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098)
relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions
scenarios. Values in parentheses are negative values and represent decreases in
precipitation. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

3.5.2.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
Again, the majority of the increase in precipitation will occur during the winter and
spring months, in which precipitation is projected to increase by an average of 10 to 14%
with a likely range of +3 to +22%, and 10 to 14% with a likely range of +2 to +25%,
respectively (USGCRP 2009). Average summer precipitation is projected to decrease by
2 to 9% with a likely range of -31 to +14% (USGCRP 2009). USGCRP (2009) projects
the likelihood of summer-time drought increasing. Annual mean precipitation in Chicago
is projected to change by -1 to +19% by the end-of-century (Hellmann et al. 2007). There
was some disagreement between studies on the magnitude of seasonal mean precipitation.
A study by the Union of Concerned Scientists (2009) found higher overall increases in
winter precipitation, with 20-50% increases in Missouri, Minnesota, and Michigan.48 The
48
This study uses three state-of-the-art global climate models (CM 2.1, HadCM3, and PCM) that together adequately
capture climate sensitivity, and the B1 emission scenario (low) and A1Fi emission scenario (high).

May 10, 2010

44

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

same study found 10-20% less rain in summer precipitation for most of the Midwest
region by the end-of-century. Heavy spring downpours (defined as two inches of rain in
one day) are expected to become more frequent during this time frame, with
approximately 30% increases projected for Iowa, Ohio, Illinois, and Wisconsin (Union of
Concerned Scientists 2009a-e).

May 10, 2010

45

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.6 Great Plains
3.6.1

Temperature
3.6.1.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Within the next two decades, the annual mean temperature of the Great Plains is
projected to increase by approximately 2.5°F, with a likely range of 1.8 to 3.1°F
(USGCRP 2009). This projected warming is greater than the 1.3°F increase already
experienced over the 1993 to 2008 time period relative to a 1961-1979 baseline
(USGCRP 2009).49 Fall temperature increases are projected to be similar to the projected
annual mean warming. Summer temperature increases are projected to be slightly higher
than the annual mean warming, at 2.7 to 2.9°F, with a likely range of 1.8 to 3.7°F
(USGCRP 2009). Spring temperature increases are expected to be slightly lower than the
annual mean increase, at 1.9 to 2.2°F, with a likely range of 1.2 to 3.0°F (USGCRP
2009); likewise, winter temperature increases are also expected to be slightly lower than
the annual mean increase, at 2.2 to 2.5°F, with a likely range of 1.4 to 3.4°F (USGCRP
2009).
Great Plains
(∆ Temperature)
Mean
Annual
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(°F)
2.4 – 2.5
1.8 – 3.1
1.1 – 3.8
2.2 – 2.5
1.4 – 3.4
0.6 – 4.2
1.9 – 2.2
1.2 – 3.0
0.5 – 3.9
2.7 – 2.9
1.8 – 3.7
0.8 – 4.6
2.4 – 2.5
1.8 – 3.3
1.1 – 4.0

Mid-century
(°F)
3.8 – 4.7
2.7 – 5.8
1.6 – 6.9
3.6 – 4.3
2.4 – 5.6
1.2 – 6.9
3.4 – 4.0
2.1 – 5.5
0.8 – 6.9
4.3 – 5.6
3.0 – 7.1
1.7 – 8.7
3.8 – 4.7
2.7 – 5.7
1.6 – 6.7

End-ofcentury (°F)
5.4 – 9.2
3.9 – 11.2
2.5 – 13.2
5.3 – 8.3
3.8 – 10.4
2.2 – 12.5
4.8 – 8.0
3.1 – 10.3
1.3 – 12.7
5.8 – 10.6
4.1 – 13.6
2.4 – 16.6
5.5 – 9.6
4.0 – 11.5
2.4 – 13.5

Table 3-10: Annual and seasonal temperature changes for the Great Plains region
over the near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (20802098) relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2)
emissions scenarios. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

49
This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center.

May 10, 2010

46

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.6.1.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
By mid-century, annual mean temperature is projected to increase by 3.8 to 4.7°F with a
likely range of 2.7 to 5.8°F (USGCRP 2009). Fall temperatures are expected to increase
similarly to the annual mean. Summer months are projected to have a greater temperature
increase of 4.3 to 5.6°F, with a likely range of 3.0 to 7.1°F (USGCRP 2009). Winter
warming is projected to be lower than the annual mean increase. Warming in the spring is
projected to be the least of all seasons, with an increase of 3.4 to 4.0°F and a likely range
of 2.1 to 5.5°F (USGCRP 2009).
3.6.1.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, annual mean temperature is projected to have increased by 5.4°F
to 9.2°F with a likely range of 3.9 to 11.2°F (USGCRP 2009). Seasonal warming trends
are projected to continue, with slightly greater or similar warming in the summer and fall
months, and less warming in the winter and spring months. Summer mean temperatures
are expected to increase 5.8 to 10.6°F, with a likely range of 4.1 to 13.6°F (USGCRP
2009). The smallest seasonal temperature increase is projected to occur in the spring,
with an increase of 4.8 to 8.0°F and a likely range of 3.1 to 10.3°F (USGCRP 2009).
Lenihan et al. (2008) made projections of changes in maximum temperatures for the Great
Plains region (the USGCRP projections reported above are for mean temperature).50 They
projected that the late century increase in maximum temperatures would be greatest in the
central and northern areas of the Great Plains. The authors found that average monthly
maximum temperatures would increase by 7 to 13°F (4 to 7°C) across Oklahoma,
Kansas, Nebraska, and North and South Dakota under lower emission (B2) and higher
emission (A2) scenarios. Texas displayed smaller increases ranging from 5 to 9°F (3 to
5°C).
3.6.2

Precipitation and Storm Events
3.6.2.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Averaging the 1993 to 2008 time period of observations across the Great Plains region
suggests that annual mean precipitation has increased by 4% relative to the 1961-1979
time period (USGCRP 2009).51 In the near-term, mean precipitation is generally
projected to increase in the winter and spring, and to decrease in the summer. It is unclear
whether fall precipitation will increase or decrease. There is considerable disagreement
between various climate models on the magnitude and direction of changes in
precipitation in that season.
50

This study provides results averaged across three GCMs for 2070-2099 relative to a 1971 to 2000 baseline.
This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center. Annual precipitation provides some indication of regional change but is not an adequate indicator when
determining impacts on transportation as it masks much of the seasonal variability.
51

May 10, 2010

47

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Over the next two decades, mean precipitation is projected to increase by 3% in the
winter, with a likely range of -2 to +7%. The spring increase is projected to be between 1
to 2%, with a likely range of -3 to +6% (USGCRP 2009). Precipitation may decrease in
the summer by 2 to 3%, with a likely range of -9 to +4%. The likely range for
precipitation in the fall is between -5 and +6% (USGCRP 2009).
3.6.2.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
Similar trends in precipitation are projected for the Great Plains through the middle of the
century. The winter months are projected to experience a mean precipitation increase of 4
to 5%, with a likely range of -1 to +9%. An increase of roughly 3% is projected for the
spring, with a likely range of -3 to +8% (USGCRP 2009). Precipitation is projected to
decline by 3 to 5% in the summer with a likely range of -18 to +7%. The likely range of
precipitation change in the fall is -9 to +7% (USGCRP 2009).
Great Plains
(∆ Precipitation)
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(%)
3
(2) – 7
(6) – 11
1–2
(3) – 6
(7) – 9
(3) – (2)
(9) – 4
(15) – 11
0
(5) – 6
(11) – 12

Mid-century
(%)
4–5
(1) – 9
(6) – 14
3
(3) – 8
(9) – 14
(5) – (3)
(18) – 7
(30) – 20
(1)
(9) – 7
(17) – 14

End-ofcentury (%)
5–8
(1) – 17
(9) – 25
3–4
(7) – 12
(16) – 21
(9) – (3)
(29) – 11
(49) – 31
(1) – 2
(17) – 12
(31) – 26

Table 3-11: Seasonal precipitation percent changes for the Great Plains region over the
near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098) relative
to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions scenarios.
Values in parentheses are negative values and represent decreases in precipitation.
Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

3.6.2.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By late century, projections indicate that the Great Plains are expected to continue to
experience wetter winters and springs, and drier summers. Mean precipitation is
projected to increase by 5 to 8% in the winter, with a likely range of -1 to +17%. Spring
precipitation is projected to increase by 3 to 4%, with a likely range of -7 to +12%
(USGCRP 2009). The summer months are projected to have 3 to 9% lower mean
precipitation, with a likely range of -29 to +11%. Projections of fall precipitation range
from a 1% decrease to a 2% increase, with a likely range of -17 to +12% (USGCRP
2009).
May 10, 2010

48

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.7 Southwest
3.7.1

Temperature
3.7.1.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Within the next several decades, the Southwest can expect to see increases in both annual
average and seasonal average temperatures, with the greatest warming expected in the
summer months. The projection for the annual mean temperature increase is
approximately 2.4°F, with a likely range of 1.7 to 3.0°F; the fall months are projected to
warm similarly (USGCRP 2009). This projected warming is greater than the 1.6°F
increase already experienced over the 1993 to 2008 time period relative to a 1961-1979
baseline (USGCRP 2009).52 The summer months are projected to experience the greatest
warming, with an increase of approximately 2.7°F and a likely range of 1.8 to 3.4°F
(USGCRP 2009). The spring and winter months are projected to have the smallest mean
temperature increase, approximately 2.2°F, and a likely range of 1.3 to 3.1°F (USGCRP
2009).
3.7.1.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
By mid-century, the ranges in mean temperature projections widen as a result of the
widening of plausible scenarios. The annual mean temperature increase for the Southwest
is projected to be 3.6 to 4.5°F with a likely range of 2.6 to 5.5°F (USGCRP 2009). Spring
and fall season averages are projected to change similarly to the annual mean. Winter is
expected to see less substantial increases than the other seasons, with projections of 3.2 to
3.9°F and a likely range of 2.0 to 5.1°F (USGCRP 2009). Conversely, mid-century
summer temperatures are projected to continue to warm more than other seasons, with
mean temperature increases of 4.1 to 5.3°F and a likely range of 3.1 to 6.5 °F (USGCRP
2009). Cayan et al. (2009) project annual mean temperature increases for the state of
California in 2050 to be between 1.8 to 5.4°F (1 to 3°C) under the lower (B1) and higher
(A2) emission scenarios, a much greater range than those provided for the Southwest.53
3.7.1.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, the annual mean temperature in the Southwest region is projected
to increase considerably compared with the earlier time horizons. The annual mean
temperature increase for the region is projected to be 5.2 to 8.7°F, with a likely range of
3.8 to 10.2°F (USGCRP 2009). As with previous periods, summer is projected to
experience the greater warming, with temperature increases of 5.6 to 9.7°F and a likely
range of 4.2 to 11.6°F. Winter is projected to see the smallest seasonal temperature
increase of 4.8 to 7.6°F, with a likely range of 3.3 to 9.4°F (USGCRP 2009). Projections
52

This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center.
53
This study uses results downscaled from six climate models (CM3, CM2.1, MICRO3.2, ECHAM5, CCSM3, PCM1)
for mid-century versus a 1961 to 1990 baseline.

May 10, 2010

49

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

from Cayan et al. (2009) for California are qualitatively consistent with the USGCRP
(2009) results. They project the annual mean temperature increase for the state of
California to be roughly 4 to 9°F (2 to 5°C) under the lower (B1) and higher (A2)
emission scenarios, with the smallest projected warming in the winter season of 1.8 to
7.2°F (1 to 4°C) and the greatest projected warming in the summer season of 2.7 to
10.8°F (1.5 to 6°C).

Southwest
(∆ Temperature)
Mean
Annual
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(°F)
2.3 – 2.4
1.7 – 3.0
1.0 – 3.7
2.1 – 2.2
1.4 – 3.0
0.6 – 3.8
2.1 – 2.2
1.3 – 3.1
0.4 – 4.0
2.6 – 2.7
1.8 – 3.4
1.1 – 4.2
2.3 – 2.4
1.7 – 3.0
1.1 – 3.6

Mid-century
(°F)
3.6 – 4.5
2.6 – 5.5
1.6 – 6.4
3.2 – 3.9
2.0 – 5.1
0.8 – 6.2
3.5 – 4.1
2.1 – 5.2
0.8 – 6.3
4.1 – 5.3
3.1 – 6.5
2.1 – 7.7
3.7 – 4.6
2.8 – 5.4
2.0 – 6.2

End-ofcentury (°F)
5.2 – 8.7
3.8 – 10.2
2.5 – 11.8
4.8 – 7.6
3.3 – 9.4
1.8 – 11.3
4.9 – 8.0
3.3 – 9.9
1.7 – 11.8
5.6 – 9.7
4.2 – 11.6
2.8 – 13.5
5.3 – 9.2
4.0 – 10.6
2.8 – 12.0

Table 3-12: Annual and seasonal temperature changes for the Southwest region
over the near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (20802098) relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2)
emissions scenarios. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

Diffenbaugh et al. (2005) project that the Southwest region could see up to 100 “high
temperature” days54 per year under a higher (A2) emission scenario. The frequency in
high temperature days for California and Utah is projected to increase by four times
today’s numbers. Additionally, the USGCRP (2009) describes heat events (a combination
of heat and humidity) that currently have a 5% chance of occurring for a given year are
projected to increase in frequency, with about a 50 to 100% chance of occurring for a
given year under a higher (A2) emission scenario. Figure 9 illustrates the geographic
variability of experiencing heat days today across the Southwest and further
demonstrates how this variability and frequency will increase by the end of the century.

54
“High temperature” days are defined as being at or above the 95th percentile among current daily temperature
records. This study uses a regional model (RegCM3) to provide projections in 2071-2095 relative to 1961-1985.

May 10, 2010

50

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Figure 9: Average number of heat days per year (defined as days the maximum temperature is above
90°F). The illustrations are 16 multi-model ensemble averages for years 1961-1979, and 2060-2099
for SRES A2. (USGCRP 2009)

3.7.2

Precipitation and Storm Events
3.7.2.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Observations in the Southwest region averaged over 1993 to 2008 suggest that annual
mean precipitation has increased by less than 1% relative to the 1961-1979 time period
(USGCRP 2009).55 Within the next several decades, winter precipitation is expected to
increase while precipitation in the other three seasons is projected to decrease. Winter
precipitation is projected to increase by 2 to 4%, with a likely range of -6 to +14%
(USGCRP 2009). The greatest seasonal decrease in precipitation of 4 to 5% is projected
for the summer season, with an associated likely range of -14 to +4% (USGCRP 2009).
3.7.2.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
The general precipitation trends projected for the next several decades are expected to
continue through the middle of the century: winter will likely see increases in
precipitation while the other seasons can expect decreases. Winter precipitation is
projected to increase by 1 to 5%, with a likely range of -6 to +16% (USGCRP 2009). The
summer and fall seasons are projected to experience decreases of 5 to 8% with a likely
range of -22 to +7%; and 2 to 3% with a likely range of -11 to +5%, respectively
(USGCRP 2009). The greatest decrease in precipitation of 6 to 10% is projected for
spring, with a likely range of -20 to 0% (USGCRP 2009).
For transportation planning purposes, the type of precipitation is similar in importance to
the amount. In the Southwest, the type of precipitation (rain vs. snow) will be affected by
the earlier onset of spring following warmer winters. Leung et al. (2004) project that the
55

This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center. Annual precipitation provides some indication of regional change; however, it is not an adequate indicator
when determining impacts on transportation as it masks much of the seasonal variability.

May 10, 2010

51

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Sierra Nevada Mountains will see a 60 to 70% decline in snowpack by mid-century
averaged over 2040 to 2060 under a business as usual scenario.56 During the same
timeframe, more precipitation is likely to fall as rain than snow in the Colorado River
Basin, with a 10 to 20% reduction in snow, and a more than 30% reduction in the
Sacramento-San Joaquin River basin (Leung et al. 2004). Averaged over 2035 to 2064,
the amount of water stored as snow in the Sierra Nevada Mountains as of April 1 is
projected to decrease by 12 to 42% at all elevations under a lower (B1) and higher (A2)
emission scenario (Cayan et al. 2008).57

Southwest
(∆ Precipitation)
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(%)
2–4
(6) – 14
(16) – 24
(5) – (4)
(10) – 2
(16) – 8
(5) – (4)
(14) – 4
(23) – 13
(1) – 0
(6) – 6
(12) – 11

Mid-century
(%)
1–5
(6) – 16
(17) – 27
(10) – (6)
(20) – 0
(31) – 10
(8) – (5)
(22) – 7
(36) – 21
(3) – (2)
(11) – 5
(20) – 13

End-ofcentury (%)
2–5
(13) – 23
(30) – 40
(19) – (7)
(32) – 1
(45) – 9
(5) – (3)
(24) – 13
(43) – 32
(1) – 0
(15) – 12
(28) – 26

Table 3-13: Seasonal precipitation percent changes for the Southwest region over
the near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098)
relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions
scenarios. Values in parentheses are negative values and represent decreases in
precipitation. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

3.7.2.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, winter precipitation is projected to increase by 2 to 5%, with a
likely range of -13 to +23%, while the remaining seasons are projected to continue to
decline in seasonal average precipitation (USGCRP 2009). The spring season is projected
to experience the greatest decrease in precipitation of 7 to 19%, with a likely range of -32
to +1% (USGCRP 2009). It is expected that the shift in precipitation type from snow to
rain will continue (USGCRP 2009). The amount of water stored as snow on April 1 is
projected to decrease by 32 to 79% under a lower (B1) and higher (A2) emission scenario
(Cayan et al. 2008). In sum, this region is expected to endure a greater likelihood of
drought while, conversely, having an increased risk of flooding (USGCRP 2009).

56

This study uses ensemble simulations of PCM/MM5.
Three climate models (CM3, CM2.1, PCM2) are downscaled for this study and a reference period of 1961-1990 is
used.
57

May 10, 2010

52

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.7.3

Sea-Level Rise

Global sea-level rise (SLR) of 7 to 79” (18cm to 2.0m) is projected for 2100 (see section
3.1.3 for discussion on global and local sea-level rise). SLR at the local/regional level is
influenced by multiple factors, including sedimentation and erosion, ocean circulation,
gravitationally induced changes, ocean density (affected by regional changes in ocean
salinity and ocean temperature), and vertical motion of the land (subsidence or uplift). In
the 20th century, the relative sea-level rise for the Southwest region is generally similar to
the level of global sea-level rise.58
The following discussion describes studies providing local sea-level rise projections for
the Southwest region. As noted in section 3.1.3 above, making local or regional
projections is highly uncertain, given the incomplete understanding of some of the effects
that can take place at the local level. There is no study that considers all these factors, nor
is there a consistent methodology applied across these studies. Therefore, local SLR
projections, while informative, should be considered carefully, and with a clear
understanding of what factors each study includes or excludes.
Projections of local sea-level rise along the California coast have been developed that
take into account tides, weather, and monthly and interannual sea level fluctuations from
El Niño/Southern Oscillation (Cayan et al. 2008). These projections are not provided here
as they do not consider other effects such as the changes in elevation of coastal land (i.e.,
caused by subsidence or uplift), local changes in ocean density, or erosion and
sedimentation on local sea-level rise. These projections are driven by conservative IPCC
global sea-level rise estimates that have been enhanced with accelerated estimates of
projected ice melt.59,60 The Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix provides the results
of this study and further finds that if the sea-level rise realized was within a moderate
estimate of the Table 3-1 projections, extreme events and their duration would increase
substantially.

58

The National Water Level Observation provides historic sea level trends for approximately 16 stations for the
Southwest U.S. coastline. These measurements are provided by NOAA and include stations that provide sea level
trends over a 30 year span or, in most cases, much longer (NOAA 2010). The Southwest trend is compared against the
global observed trend of sea-level rise of 1.8 ± 0.5 mm yr–1 from 1961 to 2003 (IPCC 2007a).
59
Local sea-level rise along the coast of California by end of century (i.e., 2070-2099) for B1 (low emissions) and A1
(high emissions) scenarios, relative to 2000. (Cayan, 2006)
60
Cayan (2008) projected relative sea-level rise at three locations along the coast of California, by mid century (i.e.,
2035-2065), and at end of century (i.e., 2070-2099), using a tidal prediction program, projections of sea level pressure
and offshore wind stresses from GFDL and PCM climate models, projections of El Niño/Southern Oscillation
variability, and global sea-level rise projections. Relative sea level projections were made under B1 (low emissions)
and A2 (high emissions) scenarios relative to 1961-1990.

May 10, 2010

53

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.8 Pacific Northwest
3.8.1

Temperature
3.8.1.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Within the next two decades, the annual mean temperature is projected to increase for the
Pacific Northwest by approximately 2°F, with a likely range of 1°F to 3°F (USGCRP
2009; Mote et al. 2005; Mote and Salathe 2009). This projected warming is greater than
the 1°F increase already experienced over the 1993 to 2008 time period relative to a
1961-1979 baseline (USGCRP 2009).61 Winter and fall changes are expected to be
relatively similar to the annual mean. Summer months are projected to experience the
greatest warming of 2.5 to 2.8°F and a likely range of 1.6 to 3.7°F (USGCRP 2009),
whereas spring months are projected to experience the smallest warming of 1.7 to 1.9°F
and a likely range of 0.8 to 3.0°F (USGCRP 2009).
3.8.1.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
By mid-century, the annual mean temperature increase is projected to be approximately
3.6 to 4.3°F, with a likely range of 2.6 to 5.4°F (USGCRP 2009). For 2040, Mote et al.
(2005) projected a slightly lower annual mean temperature increase of 3.0°F (1.6°C). The
projections of warming during winter and fall are relatively similar to the annual mean.
The smallest warming of seasonal mean temperature is projected to occur during the
spring months, at 3.1 to 3.4°F and a likely range of 1.7 to 4.7°F (USGCRP 2009). The
largest warming of seasonal mean temperature is expected to be in the summer months,
with a projected increase of 4.1 to 5.5°F and a likely range of 3.0 to 6.9°F (USGCRP
2009). This increase in temperatures is likely to cause more precipitation to fall as rain
rather than snow, particularly at lower altitudes (USGCRP 2009). Heat events are
projected to increase in the Pacific Northwest, particularly in south-central Washington
and the western lowlands. By mid-century south-central Washington could experience an
additional one to three heat waves annually, with other locations experiencing up to one
additional heat wave each year under a moderate (A1B) emission scenario (Salathe et al.
2009).62 The frequency of warm nights63 is also expected to increase by roughly 7 to 20%
across Washington (Salathe et al. 2009).
3.8.1.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, annual mean temperature is projected to have increased by 5.1 to
8.3°F, with a likely range of 3.7 to 10.0°F (USGCRP 2009). Mote and Salathe (2009)
61
This information was provided by personal communication with Jay H. Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center.
62
This study define heat waves as three or more days where daily heat index exceeds 90°F. Two climate models
(CCSM3 and ECHAM5) are used to force the Weather Research and Forecasting Regional Model.
63
Warm nights are defined as nights with a minimum temperature above the 90th percentile.

May 10, 2010

54

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

projected a smaller annual mean temperature increase of 4.8 to 6.8°F based on a low (B1)
emission scenarios and a moderate (A1B) emission scenario.64 The projections for winter
and fall months are again similar to the annual mean. The mean temperature for the
spring months is projected to increase by just 4.4 to 6.6°F, with a likely range of 2.5 to
8.9°F (USGCRP 2009). The summer months are projected to experience the greatest
warming at 5.8 to 10.5°F, with a likely range of 4.2 to 13.1°F (USGCRP 2009).
Pacific Northwest
(∆ Temperature)
Mean
Annual
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(°F)
2.2
1.4 – 2.9
0.7 – 3.7
2.1 – 2.2
1.4 – 3.0
0.6 – 3.8
1.7 – 1.9
0.8 – 3.0
(0.2) – 4.1
2.5 – 2.8
1.6 – 3.7
0.7 – 4.6
2.0 – 2.2
1.4 – 3.0
0.7 – 3.6

Mid-century
(°F)
3.6 – 4.3
2.6 – 5.4
1.6 – 6.4
3.5 – 3.9
2.3 – 5.2
1.1 – 6.5
3.1 – 3.4
1.7 – 4.7
0.3 – 6.1
4.1 – 5.5
3.0 – 6.9
1.8 – 8.4
3.4 – 4.2
2.5 – 5.3
1.5 – 6.4

End-ofcentury (°F)
5.1 – 8.3
3.7 – 10.0
2.3 – 11.8
5.1 – 7.6
3.5 – 9.5
1.8 – 11.4
4.4 – 6.6
2.5 – 8.9
0.6 – 11.2
5.8 – 10.5
4.2 – 13.1
2.5 – 15.7
4.8 – 8.4
3.5 – 10.2
2.1 – 11.9

Table 3-14: Annual and seasonal temperature changes for the Pacific Northwest
region over the near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century
(2080-2098) relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high
(A2) emissions scenarios. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

3.8.2

Precipitation and Storm Events
3.8.2.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Observations across the Pacific Northwest region averaged over 1993 to 2008 suggest
that annual mean precipitation has increased by less than 1% relative to the 1961-1979
time period (USGCRP 2009).65 Mean precipitation in the Pacific Northwest is generally
projected to increase in the winter, spring, and fall, while summer precipitation is
projected to decrease. There is considerable disagreement across various climate models
on the magnitude and direction of changes in precipitation.

64

Nineteen climate models were statistically downscaled for this study, with the 5th to 95th percentile range being 4 to
9.7 degrees Fahrenheit. The reference period is 1970-1999.
65
This information was provided by personal communication with Jay Lawrimore of the National Climatic Data
Center. Annual precipitation provides some indication of regional change; however, it is not an adequate indicator
when determining impacts on transportation as it masks much of the seasonal variability.

May 10, 2010

55

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Over the next two decades, mean precipitation is projected to increase by roughly 3 to 5%
for winter and fall seasons, with a likely range of approximately -3 to +12% (USGCRP
2009). The spring seasons are estimated to experience a slightly lower increase of 3%,
with a likely range of -1 to +7% (USGCRP 2009). Precipitation in the summer months,
on the other hand, is projected to decrease by more than 6% with a likely range of -17 to
+3% (USGCRP 2009).
3.8.2.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
By mid-century, winter mean precipitation is projected to increase by 5 to 7%, with a
likely range of -3 to +17% (USGCRP 2009). Spring and fall are also projected to undergo
precipitation increases of 3 to 5% with a likely range of -3 to +10%; and 5% with a likely
range of -3 to +13%, respectively (USGCRP 2009). Summer, on the other hand, is
projected to undergo decreases in precipitation of 8 to 17%, with a likely range of -28 to
+1% (USGCRP 2009). Springtime snowpack is projected to decrease by mid-century in
response to the increased wintertime temperature and greater occurrence of rain (versus
snow). Higher average temperatures in the fall and winter will cause more precipitation to
fall as rain rather than snow, and the snowpack will begin to melt earlier in the season.
By the 2040s, April 1st snowpack is projected to decline by as much as 40% in the
Cascade mountains (Payne et al. 2004, as cited in USGCRP 2009), and Leung et al.
(2004) projected a 10 to 20% decline in snowfall over fall, winter, and spring in the
Columbia River Basin by mid-century under a business as usual scenario. In addition,
warm-season runoff is projected to decrease by 30% or more on the western slopes of the
Cascade Mountains and by 10% in the Rocky Mountains (USGCRP 2009). The effect of
the reduction in summer precipitation will be magnified by the increased evaporation as
summer temperatures warm.
Pacific Northwest
(∆ Precipitation)
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(%)
3–5
(3) – 12
(11) – 20
3
(1) – 7
(6) – 11
(7) – (6)
(17) – 3
(27) – 12
4
(3) – 11
(10) – 18

Mid-century
(%)
5–7
(3) – 17
(12) – 27
3–5
(3) – 10
(8) – 15
(17) – (8)
(28) – 1
(40) – 10
5
(3) – 13
(11) – 21

End-ofcentury (%)
8 – 15
(1) – 29
(14) – 43
5–7
(2) – 15
(10) – 23
(22) – (11)
(42) – (1)
(62) – 18
7–9
(7) – 24
(22) – 39

Table 3-15: Seasonal precipitation percent changes for the Pacific Northwest region
over the near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (20802098) relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2)
emissions scenarios. Values in parentheses are negative values and represent
decreases in precipitation. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).
May 10, 2010

56

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

By mid-century, Salathe et al. (2009) projected that precipitation intensity, defined in this
study as annual total precipitation divided by the number of “wet” days where
precipitation exceeds 1 millimeter, would increase slightly across much of Washington,
with substantial increases occurring only in the northwest portion of the state under a
moderate (A1B) emission scenario. The fraction of precipitation that falls on days where
precipitation exceeds the 95th percentile was projected to increase in the eastern and
western parts of the state, with decreases in the central portion along the leeward side of
the Cascade Mountains (Salathe et al. 2009).
3.8.2.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, seasonal mean precipitation is projected to have increased
substantially in the winter months by 8 to 15%, with a likely range of -1 to +29%
(USGCRP 2009). Spring and fall seasonal mean precipitation totals are projected to
increase by 5 to 7% with a likely range of -2 to +15%; and 7 to 9% with a likely range of
-7 to +24%, respectively (USGCRP 2009). The summer season is projected to continue to
experience substantial declines in precipitation of 11 to 22%, with a likely range of +1 to
+42% (USGCRP 2009). Diffenbaugh (2005) projected an increase of up to 10 extreme
precipitation events per year in the Pacific Northwest (up to a 140% increase) under a
higher (A2) emission scenario with some variation depending on location within the
region.66
3.8.3 Sea-Level Rise
Global sea-level rise (SLR) of 7 to 79” (18cm to 2.0m) is projected for 2100 (see section
3.1.3 for discussion on global and local sea-level rise). SLR at the local/regional level is
influenced by multiple factors, including sedimentation and erosion, ocean circulation,
gravitationally induced changes, ocean density (affected by regional changes in ocean
salinity and ocean temperature), and vertical motion of the land (subsidence or uplift). In
the 20th century, the relative sea-level rise for the Pacific Northwest exhibits large
variability, with locations across the region exhibiting both greater and lesser rise than the
global trend.67 For the Northwest region, sea-level rise is compounded by increased beach
erosion and increased winter rainfall, which could saturate soils in the coastal bluffs
leading to landslides (USGCRP 2009).
The following discussion describes studies providing local sea-level rise projections for
this region. As noted in section 3.1.3 above, making local or regional projections is
highly uncertain, given the incomplete understanding of some of the effects that can take
66

This study defines extreme precipitation events as the number of days where precipitation exceeds the 95th percentile.
A regional model (RegCM3) was used and projections for 2071-2095 are compared against a 1961 to 1985 baseline.
67
The National Water Level Observation provides historic sea level trends for approximately 11 stations for the Pacific
Northwest U.S. coastline. These measurements are provided by NOAA and include stations that provide sea-level
trends over a 30 year span or, in most cases, much longer (NOAA 2010). The Pacific Northwest trend is compared
against the global observed trend of sea-level rise of 1.8 ± 0.5 mm yr–1 from 1961 to 2003 (IPCC 2007a).

May 10, 2010

57

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

place at the local level. There is no study that considers all these factors, nor is there a
consistent methodology applied across these studies. Therefore, local SLR projections,
while informative, should be considered carefully, and with a clear understanding of what
factors each study includes or excludes.
Mote et al. (2008) estimated local sea-level rise at three different locations along the
Washington state coast: Northwest Olympic Peninsula, the central and southern coast,
and Puget Sound. For advisory purposes only, this study provides projections of local
sea-level rise at these locations, allowing for changes in: (i) global sea-level rise, (ii)
coastal elevation from the vertical movement of land at the different locations, and (iii)
local wind patterns that push water toward or away from the coast. Mid-century and endof-century estimates of the impact of vertical land motion on sea-level rise are provided
for each location, with the end-of-century estimate of local vertical uplift being 15.7” (40
cm) for the Northeast Olympic Peninsula, 3.9” (10 cm) for the Central and the Southern
Coast, and no change for Puget Sound. Assuming these rates remain constant in the
future, studies that project global average sea-level rise should be lessened by these
amounts to obtain estimates of local sea-level change.
Sea level along the Washington coastline can undergo considerable seasonal variability,
with mean sea levels being 20” (50 cm) higher during the winter months compared with
the summer months. The seasonal variability is explained by shifts in atmospheric
circulation (winds) directly affecting the ocean elevation; that is, a northward wind can
push water towards the shore increasing ocean elevation. Based on the same premise, an
El Niño event can further increase sea level by 12” (30 cm). Based on an analysis of 30
scenarios, this study finds the changes in projected wintertime northward wind to range
from minimal (suggesting a less than 1” reduction in mean sea level for 2050 and 2100)
to increased strength (suggesting as much as a 6” (15 cm) increase in mean sea level for
2050-2099 compared with 1950-1999).68

68

Local sea-level rise at three locations along the Northwest coast mid-century (i.e., 2050) and at end of century (i.e.,
2100), projected using estimates of regional vertical land motion, atmospheric dynamics, and global sea-level rise
projected by IPCC (2007a) under B1 (low emissions) and A1F1 (high emissions) scenarios. Sea-level rise is given
relative to 1980-1999 mean sea level. The study caveats the results to be used for advisory purposes only. See Climate
Change Effects Typology Matrix for projected results. (Mote et al. 2008)

May 10, 2010

58

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.9 Alaska
3.9.1

Temperature
3.9.1.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

Within the next several decades, Alaska may experience an increase in annual average
temperature of about 2.4 to 2.6°F, with a likely range of 1.5 to 3.6°F (USGCRP 2009).
Fall and spring seasonal temperature projections are similar to the annual average. The
greatest warming is projected to occur in the winter, when temperatures are projected to
increase 3.1 to 4.0°F and a likely range of 1.0 to 5.9°F (USGCRP 2009). Summers are
projected to warm on average by 1.3°F, with a likely range of 0.6 to 2.0°F, although
summer is likely to be the least affected of all seasons (USGCRP 2009). The CCSP
(2008) projects a slightly higher average annual temperature increase of 3.6°F in Alaska
by 2030. It is interesting to note that while Alaska has warmed at more than twice the rate
of the national average (USGCRP 2009), the magnitude of the projections for the annual
mean average in Alaska is consistent with the projected annual mean averages of other
U.S. regions. The seasonal averages are also consistent with other northern regions, with
the winter months demonstrating the greatest potential increase. The higher temperatures
are reducing sea ice and glacier mass or glacier extent, leading to an earlier spring
snowmelt, and affecting permafrost (USGCRP 2009). Permafrost warming leads to land
subsidence, directly affecting highway systems (Larsen et al. 2008). These higher
temperatures will also lead to greater evaporation rates, potentially reducing soil moisture
and leading to reductions in the water levels in closed-basin lakes (USGCRP 2009).
3.9.1.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
By mid-century, the average projected increase in annual average temperature is 4.3°F
with a likely range of 3.6 to 5.0°F (USGCRP 2009). Fall and spring are expected to
continue to experience similar seasonal mean temperature changes compared with the
annual average, though with some differences. Seasonal mean temperatures for fall are
projected to increase slightly more than the annual average, by 4.4 to 4.9°F, with a likely
range of 3.5 to 5.6°F (USGCRP 2009). Mean spring temperature is projected to increase
by 3.9 to 4.0°F, with a likely range of 3.6 to 11.5°F—slightly less than the annual
average. As with the earlier projected period, the largest increase in average temperatures
occurs during the winter months, with the seasonal mean temperature increase of 6.2 to
6.4°F and a likely range of 5.1 to 7.7°F (USGCRP 2009). Summer is expected to
continue to be the least affected season, with a projected increase of 2.1 to 2.5°F and a
likely range of 0.7 to 3.5°F (USGCRP 2009).

May 10, 2010

59

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Alaska
(∆ Temperature)
Mean
Annual
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(°F)
2.4 – 2.6
1.5 – 3.6
0.4 – 4.7
3.1 – 4.0
1.0 – 5.9
(1.1) – 7.9
2.3 – 2.6
0.6 – 4.7
(1.5) – 6.8
1.3
0.6 – 2.0
(0.1) – 2.8
2.3 – 2.8
1.6 – 3.1
0.8 – 3.7

Mid-century
(°F)
4.3
3.6 – 5.0
2.9 – 5.7
6.2 – 6.4
5.1 – 7.7
3.8 – 9.0
3.9 – 4.0
2.5 – 5.5
1.1 – 7.0
2.1 – 2.5
0.7 – 3.5
(0.8) – 5.0
4.4 – 4.9
3.5 – 5.6
2.6 – 6.3

End-ofcentury (°F)
6.7 – 9.9
4.6 – 11.7
2.4 – 13.5
9.9 – 14.5
7.5 – 17.4
5.1 – 20.2
6.2 – 9.1
3.6 – 11.5
(0.9) – 14.0
3.9 – 5.9
1.5 – 8.7
(1.0) – 13.9
7.0 – 10.0
4.9 – 11.5
2.8 – 13.0

Table 3-16: Annual and seasonal temperature changes for Alaska over the nearterm (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098) relative
to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions
scenarios. Parentheses represent negative projections. Data are from the USGCRP
(2009) and are based on the five climate models identified as the top performers for
Alaska by Walsh et al. (2008). The results listed in the typology matrix for Alaska
are provided for the suite of models consistent with the other U.S. regions.

3.9.1.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By late century, Alaska will likely see an increase of 6.7 to 9.9°F in average annual
temperature, with a likely range of 4.6 to 11.7°F (USGCRP 2009). Spring and fall
seasonal mean temperature projections continue to follow the annual trends. Winter will
continue to be the most affected of the seasons, with an average seasonal temperature
increase of 9.9 to 14.5°F and a likely range of 7.5 to 17.4°F (USGCRP 2009). Summer is
likely to remain the least affected of the seasons, with projected increases of 3.9°F to
5.9°F and a likely range of 1.5 to 8.7°F (USGCRP 2009). By the end of the 21st century,
northern Alaska could see surface temperatures increase by more than 9.0°F (5°C) (IPCC
2007a) and permafrost temperatures on the Seward Peninsula could increase by 0 to
5.8°F (Busey et al. 2008) under a moderate (A1B) emission scenario.69 Additionally, by
the 2080 to 2100 period, an extreme heat event that currently has a 5% chance of
occurring per year is likely to have a 10% chance of occurring within a given year under
a higher (A2) emission scenario (USGCRP 2009).

69
This study uses the TOPP numerical model and compares 2090-2100 projections relative to 2001-2004 temperatures.
Largest change is on the coast with some high elevation areas becoming slightly colder.

May 10, 2010

60

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.9.2

Precipitation and Storm Events
3.9.2.1 Near­term (2010­2040)

The winter months are projected to have the most noticeable change in seasonal
precipitation. Within the next several decades, Alaska is likely to experience an increase
in winter mean precipitation of 6 to 9% with a likely range of +1 to +16% (USGCRP
2009). Similar to projected temperatures, summer will likely be the least affected of the
seasons in terms of precipitation. Summer is expected to experience an increase in mean
precipitation of approximately 6% with a likely range of +3 to +9% (USGCRP 2009).
Spring and fall are estimated to receive additional precipitation of 5 to 8% with a likely
range of +0 to +15%; and 7 to 8% with a likely range of +4 to +11%, respectively
(USGCRP 2009).
3.9.2.2 Mid­century (2040­2070)
By mid-century, winters in Alaska may continue to experience the largest seasonal
increase in mean precipitation, 15 to 17%, with a likely range of 10 to 20% (USGCRP
2009). Spring is likely to be the least affected of the seasons, with changes in mean
precipitation estimated to by an increase of 9 to 12% with a likely range of +3 to +15%.
The average projected increases for fall and summer mean precipitation are moderate
compared with the other seasons at 10 to 14%, with a likely range of +8 to +16%; and 11
to 13%, with a likely range of +7 to +17%, respectively (USGCRP 2009).
Alaska
(∆ Precipitation)
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(%)
6–9
1 – 16
(5) – 23
5–8
0 – 15
(7) – 22
6
3–9
(1) – 13
7–8
4 – 11
1 – 13

Mid-century
(%)
15 – 17
10 – 20
4 – 25
9 – 12
3 – 15
(3) – 21
11 – 13
7 – 17
3 – 20
10 – 14
8 – 16
6 – 19

End-ofcentury (%)
23 – 37
18 – 48
13 – 59
18 – 30
12 – 34
7 – 38
17 – 23
14 – 29
11 – 36
17 – 30
9 – 39
1 – 46

Table 3-17: Seasonal precipitation percent changes for Alaska over the near-term
(2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098) relative to 19611979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions scenarios. Values in
parentheses are negative values and represent decreases in precipitation. Data are
from the USGCRP (2009) and are based on the five climate models identified as the
top performers for Alaska by Walsh et al. (2008). The results listed in the typology
matrix for Alaska are provided for the suite of models consistent with the other U.S.
regions.
May 10, 2010

61

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.9.2.3 End­of­century (2070­2100)
By the end-of-century, winter will likely continue to see the greatest increases in total
seasonal precipitation. Winters in Alaska could see an 23 to 37% increase in mean
precipitation, with a likely range of +18 to +48% (USGCRP 2009). The fall season is
likely to experience the smallest increases of 17 to 30%, with a likely range of +9 to
+39% (USGCRP 2009). Spring and summer continue to demonstrate moderate increases
compared with the other seasons, at 18 to 30%, with a likely range of +12 to +34%; and
17 to 23%, with a likely range of +14 to +29%, respectively (USGCRP 2009).
Storm activity may increase as the Pacific storm track moves northward and sea surface
temperatures increase (USGCRP 2009). These storms are expected to be situated over
oceans with less ice cover (both in magnitude and seasonal duration), and may increase in
frequency and intensity as the warmer ocean may supply these storm with more heat and
moisture (USGCRP 2009).
3.9.3

Sea-Level Rise

Global sea-level rise (SLR) of 7 to 79” (18cm to 2.0m) is projected for 2100 (see section
3.1.3 for discussion on global and local sea-level rise). SLR at the local/regional level is
influenced by multiple factors, including sedimentation and erosion, ocean circulation,
gravitationally induced changes, ocean density (affected by regional changes in ocean
salinity, and ocean temperature), and vertical motion of the land (subsidence or uplift). In
the 20th century, the relative sea-level rise for Alaska exhibits large variability, with some
locations demonstrating slightly greater rise compared to observed global sea-level rise,
and with other stations demonstrating considerably lower.70 Parts of Alaska are
undergoing uplift in response to glacial ice loss and active regional tectonic deformation
at a rate considered to keep pace with rising global sea levels. In fact, relative sea level in
the southeast and south central Gulf of Alaska coastal area may actually decrease
substantially (Larsen et al. 2004; Kelly et al. 2007). It should be noted that under high
sea-level rise projections, it is possible that sea-level rise rates may approach or exceed
uplift rates.

70

The National Water Level Observation provides historic sea level trends for approximately 15 stations for the Alaska
U.S. coastline. These measurements are provided by NOAA and include stations that provide sea level trends over a
30-year span or, in most cases, much longer (NOAA 2010). This trend is compared against the global observed trend of
sea-level rise of 1.8 ± 0.5 mm/yr from 1961 to 2003 (IPCC 2007a).

May 10, 2010

62

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.10 Hawaii
3.10.1 Temperature
Over the next few decades, annual mean temperatures in Hawaii are projected to increase
by about 1.8°F, with a likely range of 1.0 to 2.5°F (USGCRP 2009). The seasonal mean
temperatures and ranges are very similar to the annual mean, with an even consistency of
warming throughout the year. This relationship continues through to the end-of-century.
By mid-century, the annual mean temperatures may increase by 2.7 to 3.3°F with a likely
range of 2.0 to 4.0°F (USGCRP 2009). By the end-of-century, the annual mean
temperature is projected to have increased by 3.9 to 6.7°F with a likely range of 2.8 to
7.8°F (USGCRP 2009). Some small seasonal variations from the annual mean are
projected for the end-of-century.

Hawaii
(∆ Temperature)
Mean
Annual
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(°F)
1.7 – 1.8
1.0 – 2.5
0.3 – 3.2
1.7
1.0 – 2.4
0.3 – 3.0
1.6 – 1.8
0.9 – 2.6
0.1 – 3.4
1.8
1.0 – 2.6
0.1 – 3.4
1.8
1.0 – 2.6
0.3 – 3.3

Mid-century
(°F)
2.7 – 3.3
2.0 – 4.0
1.2 – 4.6
2.7 – 3.2
1.9 – 3.9
1.1 – 4.6
2.7 – 3.2
1.9 – 3.7
1.1 – 4.3
2.7 – 3.4
1.9 – 4.0
1.1 – 4.7
2.8 – 3.5
2.0 – 4.4
1.2 – 5.2

End-ofcentury (°F)
3.9 – 6.7
2.8 – 7.8
1.8 – 8.9
3.8 – 6.4
2.7 – 7.5
1.6 – 8.5
3.8 – 6.3
2.8 – 7.2
1.8 – 8.1
3.9 – 6.7
2.8 – 7.9
1.7 – 9.2
4.0 – 7.2
2.8 – 8.7
1.6 – 10.3

Table 3-18: Annual and seasonal temperature changes for Hawaii over the near-term
(2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098) relative to 19611979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions scenarios. Data are
from the USGCRP (2009).

3.10.2 Precipitation and Storm Events
3.10.2.1

Near­term (2010­2040)

While the temperature is not expected to have much seasonal variation, precipitation is
projected to vary seasonally. Over the next few decades, the greatest decrease in
precipitation is projected to occur during the summer months, with declines of 3 to 5%
and a likely range of -18 to +8% (USGCRP 2009). Winter mean precipitation is also
projected to decrease by approximately 2% and a likely range of -15 to +10% (USGCRP
May 10, 2010

63

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

2009). Fall mean precipitation is projected to change between -1 to +2%, with a likely
range of -11 to +11% (USGCRP 2009). Spring mean precipitation is projected to change
by 0 to +1%, with a likely range of -10 to +11% (USGCRP 2009).

Hawaii
(∆ Precipitation)
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(%)
(2)
(15) – 10
(27) – 22
0–1
(10) – 11
(20) – 21
(5) – (3)
(18) – 8
(30) – 20
(1) – 2
(11) – 11
(21) – 21

Mid-century
(%)
(3) – (2)
(21) – 18
(40) – 37
(2)
(13) – 9
(24) – 20
(3) –(1)
(23) – 21
(45) – 43
3–6
(15) – 27
(36) – 47

End-ofcentury (%)
(4) – (1)
(25) – 22
(47) – 46
(5) – 6
(20) – 9
(34) – 22
(1) – 5
(42) – 51
(88) – 98
1 – 19
(38) – 75
(95) – 132

Table 3-19: Seasonal precipitation percent changes for the Hawaii over the near-term
(2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098) relative to 19611979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions scenarios. Values in
parentheses are negative values and represent decreases in precipitation. Data are
from the USGCRP (2009).

3.10.2.2

Mid­century (2040­2070)

By mid-century, only the fall months are projected to increase in precipitation, by 3 to 6%
and a likely range of -15 to +27% (USGCRP 2009). The other three seasons are projected
to decrease in precipitation. The winter and spring months are similar in projected mean
change but not when comparing the likely range. The winter months continue to project a
decrease in mean precipitation by 2 to 3% with a likely range of -21 to +18% (USGCRP
2009). The spring months may have a decrease in mean precipitation by 2%, with a likely
range of -13 to +9% (USGCRP 2009). The summer months have a larger variability of
decreased mean precipitation of 1 to 3%, with a likely range of -23 to +21% (USGCRP
2009).
3.10.2.3

End­of­century (2070­2100)

By the end-of-century, the winter months continue to demonstrate a decrease in mean
precipitation of 1 to 4%, with a likely range of -25 to +22% (USGCRP 2009). The spring
and summer months have a mean change in precipitation that crosses direction. The
changes in spring mean precipitation vary between a decrease of 5% to an increase of
6%, with a likely range of -20 to +9% (USGCRP 2009). The changes in summer mean
precipitation vary between a decrease of 1% to an increase of 5%, with a large likely
May 10, 2010

64

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

range of -42 to +51% (USGCRP 2009). The fall months exhibit an increase in the mean
change for precipitation, of 1 to 19%, with a likely range of -38 to +75% (USGCRP
2009).
3.10.3 Sea-Level Rise
Global sea-level rise (SLR) of 7 to 79” (18cm to 2.0m) is projected for 2100 (see section
3.1.3 for discussion on global and local sea-level rise). SLR at the local/regional level is
influenced by multiple factors, including sedimentation and erosion, ocean circulation,
gravitationally induced changes, ocean density (affected by regional changes in ocean
salinity and ocean temperature), and vertical motion of the land (subsidence or uplift). In
the 20th century, the relative sea-level rise for Hawaii is generally similar to that of
observed global sea-level rise.71 Some islands are particularly vulnerable to sea-level rise
and storm surge, with resulting shoreline erosion. For example, the Northwestern
Hawaiian Islands are low-lying islands particularly vulnerable to sea-level rise (USGCRP
2009).

71

The National Water Level Observation provides historical sea-level trends for 5 stations in Hawaii. These
measurements are provided by NOAA and include stations that provide sea-level trends over a 30-year span or, in most
cases, much longer (NOAA 2010). This trend is compared against the global observed trend of sea-level rise of 1.8 ±
0.5 mm/yr from 1961 to 2003 (IPCC 2007a).

May 10, 2010

65

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.11 Puerto Rico
The information provided below represents the Caribbean region.
3.11.1 Temperature
Over the next few decades, the annual mean temperatures are projected to increase by
about 1.7°F, with a likely range of 1.2 to 2.1°F (USGCRP 2009). The magnitude of the
warming is expected to be roughly similar in all four seasons through to the end-ofcentury. By mid-century, the annual mean temperatures may increase by 2.5 to 3.1°F,
with a likely range of 2.0 to 3.5°F (USGCRP 2009). By the end-of-century, the annual
mean temperature is projected to have increased by 3.6 to 6.1°F, with a likely range of
2.7 to 6.8°F (USGCRP 2009).
Caribbean
(∆ Temperature)
Mean
Annual
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(°F)
1.6 – 1.7
1.2 – 2.1
0.8 – 2.5
1.6
1.1 – 2.0
0.8 – 2.5
1.5 – 1.6
1.1 – 2.0
0.6 – 2.5
1.7 – 1.8
1.2 – 2.1
0.8 – 2.6
1.7 – 1.8
1.3 – 2.1
0.9 – 2.5

Mid-century
(°F)
2.5 – 3.1
2.0 – 3.5
1.4 – 3.9
2.4 – 3.0
1.9 – 3.5
1.3 – 3.9
2.5 – 3.0
1.9 – 3.4
1.3 – 3.7
2.6 – 3.2
2.1 – 3.6
1.5 – 4.0
2.7 – 3.3
2.1 – 3.7
1.5 – 4.1

End-ofcentury (°F)
3.6 – 6.1
2.7 – 6.8
1.9 – 7.5
3.5 – 5.8
2.6 – 6.6
1.7 – 7.5
3.5 – 5.8
2.7 – 6.5
1.8 – 7.2
3.7 – 6.2
2.8 – 6.9
1.9 – 7.6
3.7 – 6.4
2.8 – 7.1
1.9 – 7.9

Table 3-20: Annual and seasonal temperature changes for the Caribbean over the
near-term (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098)
relative to 1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions
scenarios. Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

3.11.2 Precipitation and Storm Events
Overall, the Caribbean is expected to experience significant reductions in precipitation
for almost all seasons and time horizons. The greatest reduction of precipitation is
projected for the summer and spring months, and the least reduction in the winter and fall
months.

May 10, 2010

66

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.11.2.1

Near­term (2010­2040)

Over the next few decades, the largest reduction in mean precipitation is expected in the
summer months of 10 to 7%, with a likely range of -16 to +1% (USGCRP 2009). Winter
mean precipitation is also projected to decrease by approximately 1 to 3% and a likely
range of -9 to +5% (USGCRP 2009). Fall mean precipitation is projected to decrease by 1
to 2%, with a likely range of -9 to +6% (USGCRP 2009). Spring mean precipitation is
projected to decrease by 6 to 7%, with a likely range of –15 to +2% (USGCRP 2009).

Caribbean
(∆ Precipitation)
Mean
Winter
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Spring
Likely
Very Likely
Summer Mean
Likely
Very Likely
Mean
Fall
Likely
Very Likely

Near-term
(%)
(3) – (1)
(9) – 5
(15) – 11
(7) – (6)
(15) – 2
(24) – 11
(10) – (7)
(16) – 1
(23) – 8
(2) – (1)
(9) – 6
(16) – 12

Mid-Term
(%)
(5) – (3)
(14) – 5
(22) – 12
(16) – (8)
(25) – 0
(33) – 9
(18) – (12)
(31) – (1)
(44) – 11
(4) – (3)
(15) – 7
(26) – 18

Long-Term
(%)
(8) – (2)
(22) – 6
(35) – 19
(28) – (9)
(39) – 2
(51) – 13
(36) – (14)
(52) – 0
(68) – 14
(9) – (4)
(28) – 10
(47) – 29

Table 3-21: Seasonal precipitation percent changes for the Caribbean over the nearterm (2010-2029), mid-century (2040-2059) and end-of-century (2080-2098) relative to
1961-1979. The range values are from low (B1) and high (A2) emissions scenarios.
Values in parentheses are negative values and represent decreases in precipitation.
Data are from the USGCRP (2009).

3.11.2.2

Mid­century (2040­2070)

Mid-century precipitation is expected to continue to have declined in all seasons. The
winter and fall months are projected to have similar mean changes; but their likely ranges
are noticeably different. The fall months are projected to decrease in precipitation by 3 to
4%, with a likely range of -15 to +7% (USGCRP 2009). The winter months are projected
to decrease in mean precipitation by 3 to 5%, with a likely range of -14 to +5%
(USGCRP 2009). The spring months are projected to have a substantial decrease in mean
precipitation by 8 to16%, with a likely range of -25 to 0% (USGCRP 2009). The summer
months are expected to have a larger decrease in mean precipitation of 12 to 18%,with a
likely range of -31 to -1% (USGCRP 2009).

May 10, 2010

67

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

3.11.2.3

End­of­century (2070­2100)

Precipitation totals are expected to continue to decline through the end-of-century. The
winter months are projected to continue to experience a decrease in mean precipitation of
2 to 8%, with a likely range of -22 to +6% (USGCRP 2009). The spring mean
precipitation is projected to decrease by 9 to 28%, with a likely range of -39 to +2%
(USGCRP 2009). The summer mean precipitation is projected to decrease by 14 to 36%,
with a large likely range of -52 to 0% (USGCRP 2009). The fall months are projected to
experience a decrease in mean precipitation of 4 to 9%, with a likely range of -28 to
+10% (USGCRP 2009).
3.11.3 Sea-level rise
Global sea-level rise (SLR) of 7 to 79” (18cm to 2.0m) is projected for 2100 (see section
3.1.3 for discussion on global and local sea-level rise). SLR at the local/regional level is
influenced by multiple factors, including sedimentation and erosion, ocean circulation,
gravitationally induced changes, ocean density (affected by regional changes in ocean
salinity and ocean temperature), and vertical motion of the land (subsidence or uplift). In
the 20th century, the relative sea-level rise for the Caribbean is generally slightly less than
that of global sea-level rise. 72

72

The National Water Level Observation provides historical sea-level trends for 2 stations in Puerto Rico. These
measurements are provided by NOAA and include stations that provide sea-level trends over a 30 year span or, in most
cases, much longer (NOAA 2010). This trend is compared against the global observed trend of sea-level rise of 1.8 ±
0.5 mm yr–1 from 1961 to 2003 (IPCC 2007a).

May 10, 2010

68

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

4 Future Work
4.1 Improvements to current projections
The climate projections provided in this report are based mostly on the results from a
collection of global climate models aggregated to the multi-state regional scale. This set
of data is uniformly available across all regions in the United States. Additional
information of downscaled projections has been provided at the state or sub-state level as
available. In the coming years, the data provided in this report will likely become
outdated as model simulations and downscaling techniques that provide regional- and
local-scale climate projections continue to evolve. Ideally, information downscaled to the
local level will become uniformly available, a task perhaps for a National Climate
Service.
4.1.1

Uncertainty

Uncertainty in the projections provided in this report includes model uncertainty and
emission uncertainty (i.e., how closely emissions and concentrations of GHGs in the
future match the two scenarios—the B1 and A2 scenarios—used in this report), while
natural variability is not directly assessed. As climate science progresses, the degree of
uncertainty is likely to be reduced—particularly for regional-scale projections. For
example, Hawkins and Sutton (2009) suggest that the uncertainty associated with
regional projections in the near-term, dominated by model uncertainty and natural
variability, could be significantly reduced through scientific progress.
4.1.2

Precipitation, Storm Events, and Sea-level rise

Certain climate effects are particularly problematic to model, while others are simply not
available at the regional or finer scale. Of the climate effects discussed by region in this
report, precipitation and storm events are particularly challenging. For many regions,
there is a large range of plausible values for precipitation that may swing dramatically
between significant increases to significant decreases. As science hones its skills
representing the water cycle and the degree of uncertainty decreases, these ranges may
narrow. In addition, changes in precipitation extremes (e.g., precipitation frequency,
duration, and intensity) are extremely important for planning purposes but sparsely
addressed in the literature at the regional or local scale.
Continued research in building techniques for assessing projected storm growth is
another area of concern for highway planners. Across the United States, storms of interest
can vary between small-scale convective storms (i.e., thunderstorms) to larger-scaled
cyclones (i.e., Nor’easters and other mid-latitude extratropical cyclones, tropical storms,
and hurricanes). There are many factors that contribute to whether a specific storm will
May 10, 2010

69

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

grow or dissipate. For example, the growth of a tropical storm into a hurricane depends
on such factors as wind shear, vertical temperature structure over the ocean, and sea
surface temperatures, all of which can vary differently in a changing climate system. It is
a challenge for climate models to capture these various components and then project how,
under a changing climate, they may affect storms.
The global estimate of sea-level rise associated with thermal expansion and ice melting is
an area of intense research, with studies continually being published with new methods
and refined estimates. It is likely that the global estimate of sea-level rise will continue to
evolve in the coming years. This report also discusses projected local sea-level rise where
global estimates are applied and adjusted through considering local factors such as
vertical land motion, ocean circulation, erosion and sedimentation, and ocean density. As
these projections can vary significantly between nearby locations due to local variability
of these contributing factors, local-scale efforts that address these factors would provide
additional data to assist highway planners. Currently, no study presented in this report
provides all inclusive sea-level rise projections taking all of these factors into account. It
is understood that scientists are improving their skills and methods in estimating the
observed and projected local variability; the results of these efforts will provide highway
planners with increased accuracy in estimating local sea-level rise.
4.2 Additional climate variables or enhanced techniques
Changes in solar radiation and humidity can affect highway systems. Though climate
models do provide projections of these variables, the work is still rudimentary in using
these projections for addressing climate change impacts.73 . In the future, it is likely that
data and projections for these variables will be available in a form useful to highway
planners.
This report broadly discusses the impacts of the climate projections by treating each
climate variable separately. New techniques may become available that account for the
impact of multiple climate effects on a particular component of the highway system. For
example, many in the health sector have replaced the use of maximum temperature with a
heat index (a combination of maximum temperature and relative humidity) in
determining the impact of heat events on mortality. Similar climate variable combinations
may be determined that perform better in assessing the projected impacts on the highway
system. For example, the assessments of projected impacts could be examined through
engineering design specifications associated with worst-case scenarios. Instead of
determining impact by isolating each climate effect (i.e., investigating the projected
change associated with each engineering design specification), this effort would take the
next step to combine the impacts associated with all the design specifications, thereby
providing an approximation of impacts from multiple climate effects.

73

Though climate models provide humidity as an output variable, much of the available literature that investigates
humidity projections use a relationship based on temperature projections.

May 10, 2010

70

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

5 Acronyms and Glossary
Acronyms
BCCR BCM2.0: Bjerknes Centre for Climate Research (BCCR) Bergen Climate Model
(BCM) Version 2, Norway
CCSM3.0: National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community Climate
System Model, Version 3.0
CGCM3.1: Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and Analysis Coupled General
Circulation Model, Version 3.1, Canada
CNRM: Centre National de Recherches Météorologiques, France
CCSP: Climate Change Science Program
CIG: Climate Impacts Group
CSIRO: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Australia
DOT: Department of Transportation
FHWA: Federal Highway Administration
GHG: Greenhouse gas
GCM: General Circulation Model
GFDL CM 2.0: Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory Climate Model, Version 2.0
GFDL CM 2.1: Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory Climate Model, Version 2.1
GISS AOM: Goddard Institute for Space Studies, Atmosphere-Ocean Model
HadCM3: Hadley Centre Coupled Model, Version 3, United Kingdom
HadGEM1: Hadley Centre Global Environmental Model, Version 1, United Kingdom
IAP FGOALS-g1.0: Institute of Atmospheric Physics (IAP), Flexible Global Ocean
Atmosphere Land System (FGOALS) model, Gridpoint Version 1.0, China
INM-CM3.0: Institute of Numerical Mathematics Coupled Model, Version 3.0, Russia
IPCC: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPCC AR4: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report
IPSL CM4: L’Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace Coupled Model, Version 4, France
MIROC3.2(hires): Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate, High Resolution
Version, Center for Climate System Research, Japan
MIROC3.2(medres): Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate, Medium
Resolution Version, Center for Climate System Research, Japan
MIUB ECHO-G: Meteorological Institute University of Bonn (MIUB), ECHO-G,
Germany
May 10, 2010

71

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

MPI ECHAM: Max Planck Institute for Meteorology (MPI), ECHAM model, Version 5,
Germany
MRI CGCM 2.3.2a: Meteorological Research Institute (MRI), Coupled General
Circulation Model (CGCM), Version 2.3.2a, Japan
NCAR: National Center for Atmospheric Research
NCDC: National Climatic Data Center, National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA)
NRC: National Research Council
PCM: Parallel Climate Model
SAP: Synthesis and Assessment Product
SRES: Special Report Emission Scenarios
USGCRP: United States Global Change Research Program
Glossary
This information is summarized from a collection of sources (USGCRP 2009, CCSP
2008a, CCSP 2009b, IPCC 2007a, Lutgens and Tarbuck 2007, Ahrens 2007).
1-in-20 weather event
An extreme weather event (e.g., extreme temperature, heat wave, rainfall, storms, storm
surges) of a severity that has a probability of occurring only once every 20 years (i.e., a
5% chance of occurring in any given year, or with a severity at the 95th percentile of
similar events). However, an event occurring in one year does not preclude the event
from occurring the following year or even the following week.
Annual mean temperature
The arithmetic mean, or average, of daily temperatures for a given year.
Climate change effects
Changes in climate variables that are brought about by climate change.
Climate models
A model that incorporates the principles of physics, chemistry, and biology into a
mathematical model of climate.
Climate stressors
For the purposes of this report, climate stressors are climate effects that affect the design,
construction, operation, and/or maintenance of transportation infrastructure.
Climate variables
Physical characteristics of climate, such as temperature, humidity, level of precipitation,
frequency of storms, sea-level rise, that can be quantified using climate models.

May 10, 2010

72

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Diurnal temperature range
The variation in temperature between the minimum (lowest) temperature and the
maximum (highest) temperature for a given day.
Downscaling
Mathematical techniques that have been developed to transform the projected climate
effects of global climate models to a regional scale. Global climate models partition the
world into large grids of cells that hide regional details; downscaling is used to provide
climate effect results at a finer resolution. Downscaling techniques generally can be
classified as either statistical downscaling or dynamic downscaling.
Downscaling, statistical
Statistical downscaling determines a relationship between the climate model output of a
climate effect for a past 30- to 40-year time period and the observed climate effect for the
same time period. This relationship is then used to downscale the projected climate model
output for that particular climate effect. This approach is best when the determined
relationship is robust over time; that is, the processes governing the climate effect remain
fixed with time. This may not always be an appropriate method for downscaling
precipitation projections (NECIA 2006).
Downscaling, dynamical
Dynamical downscaling uses a regional model equipped with small-scale processes and
local topography. The climate model data are used as inputs around the boundaries of the
regional model. This technique allows for capturing the effects of local topography.
Though this process tends to be expensive and time-consuming, it does include
dynamical changes in response to large-scale forcing. Given the investment for this
approach, dynamical downscaled studies generally provide projections based on the
results from only a single climate model.
Effects typology matrix
A tool to summarize projected climate effects by: geographic location, time horizon,
emission scenario, and climate variable. The effects typology matrix developed in this
report can be found in Appendix C.
Emissions scenarios
Hypothetical scenarios of future greenhouse gas emissions profiles.
Time horizon, End-of-century
For the purposes of this report, End-of-century refers to a 2070 to 2100 time horizon.
Evaporation
The process through which a liquid is transformed into a gas.
Extreme cold events
An extreme weather event characterized by very cold temperatures. The exact definition
May 10, 2010

73

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

of what is meant by an extreme cold event can vary. For example, extreme cold events
may be defined as temperatures below the 5th percentile for a given region.
Extreme weather events
Weather events that exhibit very severe conditions such as intense levels of precipitation
or high levels of wind and can cause significant damage. These events can include
intense tornado-breeding convective storms, well-developed mid-latitude cyclones (such
as a nor’easter), and tropical storms (particularly ones that develop into hurricanes).
Extreme heat day
The maximum temperature for a given day exceeds 90°F (in some studies, this term is
defined as the maximum temperature for a given day exceeds 100°F).
Extreme heat event
Has multiple definitions of duration and intensity, and generally is a relative measure to
local climate conditions. The Centers for Disease Control defines it as a temperature 10°F
or more above the average high temperature for a region, lasting several weeks. Other
sources define the event by the apparent temperature (determined through a calculation
based on maximum temperature and humidity) reaching above a 1-in-20-year event (or
an event that has a 5% chance of occurring per year).
Fall months
September, October, and November (SON)
Freeze-thaw cycle
Period of time that elapses between freezing and thawing conditions.
Heat waves
Three or more days where daily heat index exceeds 90°F.
High Temperature Day
At or above the 95th percentile among current daily temperature records (Diffenbaugh et
al 2005).
Humidity, relative
The ratio of air’s water vapor content to its water vapor capacity.
Hurricanes
A tropical cyclonic storm having minimum winds of 74 miles per hour (64 knots, or 119
kilometers per hour).
Interglacial period
Period of warm global average temperatures between two glacial periods within an ice
age. The Earth is currently in an interglacial period called the Holocene.

May 10, 2010

74

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Jet stream, polar
A swift, westerly airstream in the upper troposphere that meanders in relatively narrow
belts and is a result of the boundary between two surface air masses: warm southern air
and cold northern air. The polar jet stream is usually located between 9 to 12 km above
the Earth’s surface (altitude).
Emissions scenario; low emissions scenario (B1)
The low emissions scenario referenced in this report corresponds with the B1 emission
scenario developed by the IPCC (2000). This scenario describes a “convergent world”
with low population growth and rapid changes in the global economy toward service and
information sectors. It assumes reductions in material intensity, and the introduction of
clean and resource-efficient technologies. (IPCC 2000)
Time horizon, Mid-century
For the purposes of this report, Mid-century refers to a 2040 to 2070 time horizon.
Emissions scenario; moderately high “business as usual” emission scenario (A2)
The moderately high, or “business as usual” emission scenario referenced in this report
corresponds with the A2 emission scenario developed by the IPCC (2000). “Business as
usual” refers to an emission scenario that is assumed to occur without any effort to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions from present practices. The A2 scenario describes a
“fragmented” future with less cooperation between world governments, high population
growth, and regionally oriented economic development that results in slow per capita
economic growth and technological change. (IPCC 2000)
Multi-model ensemble
A collection of results from several different climate models. An ensemble of results
allows scientists to investigate the range of uncertainty in the results produced from
climate models (i.e., to quantify a degree of model uncertainty).
Time horizon, Near-term
For the purposes of this report, near-term refers to a 2010 to 2040 time horizon.
Non-climate stressors
For the purposes of this report, non-climate stressors are effects that are unrelated to
climate that affect the design, construction, operation, and maintenance of transportation
infrastructure.
Ocean circulation
The water in the Earth’s ocean moves dynamically around the globe, driven by motion of
the Earth’s atmosphere with the large-scale oceanic circulation pattern (thermohaline
circulation) influencing small-scale circulations.
Ocean salinity
The concentration of salt within ocean waters, which affects water density and surface
water absorption of carbon dioxide.

May 10, 2010

75

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Paleoclimate
The study of past climates on Earth. According to the NASA Goddard Institute of Space
Studies, the study of past climates provide insight into how the Earth’s atmosphere,
oceans, biosphere, and cryosphere has evolved and responded to past climatic forcing
(GISS, 2009).
Precipitation, duration
A measure describing the length of time of precipitation.
Precipitation, frequency
A measure of how often precipitation occurs.
Precipitation, intensity
A measure of the rate of precipitation, or the amount of precipitation that falls within a
given time period. Typically measured as inches of precipitation per day.
Precipitation
In this report, precipitation refers to all forms including rain, snow, or sleet.
Rain/snow line
The location within a storm where the precipitation shifts from rain to snow.
Sea-level, mean
Average relative sea level over a long enough time period to average out wave/tide
variability (such as a month or year).
Sea-level rise, relative
The sea level measured by a tide gauge with respect to the land upon which it is situated
(IPCC 2007a).
Sea-level rise, global
World-wide average rise in sea level. A number of factors contribute to this rise, such as
thermal expansion and ice/glacier melting (CCSP 2009).
Solar radiation
Wavelike energy emitted by the Sun that possesses heat.
Spatial resolution
The level of detail provided by a climate model in assessing climate effects. Spatial
resolution refers to the size of the grid used to partition the area being studied. The model
calculates climate variable results for each cell within the grid.
Spring months
March, April, May (MAM)

May 10, 2010

76

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Subsidence
Local land mass lowers due to plate tectonics. This term is considered when determining
relative sea-level rise.
Summer months
June, July, August (JJA)
Thermal expansion (of oceans)
The increase in molecular motion of ocean water in response to warming, where this
motion leads to an increase in volume space for the same number of molecules. Generally
considered when estimating how sea level will change as temperatures warm.
Uncertainty
Uncertainty in model projections covers three main contributors: natural variability,
choice of emission scenarios, and climate models. Uncertainty is further discussed in
Section 2.
Uncertainty; likely range (for the projection of a given climate variable)
The likely range is computed by first determining the standard deviation above and below
the average for each of the two scenarios examined in this report. Assuming the data are
well represented by a Gaussian distribution, the likely range represents about 68% of the
values extending from the 15th percentile to the 85th percentile. Then, the minimum and
maximum of these four values (i.e., two from each scenario) are defined as the likely
range. The range is a measure of the differences (and uncertainty) associated with the
models that were used as well as the uncertainty of future emission rates.
Uncertainty; mean range (for the projection of a given climate variable)
The mean range is the average of all simulations in the lower emission scenario (B1) and
the average of all of the simulations in the higher emission scenario (A2). It is a simple
measure of the central tendency of the projections and the uncertainty associated with
future greenhouse gas emission rates.
Uncertainty; very likely range (for the projection of a given climate variable)
The very likely range is computed the same way as the likely range, except that two
standard deviations are used instead of one. Assuming the data are well represented by a
Gaussian distribution, the very likely range represents about 95% of the values extending
from the 2.2nd percentile to the 97.8th percentile.
Uplift
Local rising of land masses through plate tectonics and/or thermal buoyancy. Uplift is
considered when determining local sea-level rise.
Vertical land motion
Shifting of land masses through plate tectonics and/or thermal buoyancy. This motion is
considered when determining local sea-level rise.

May 10, 2010

77

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Winter months
December, January, February(DJF)

May 10, 2010

78

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

6 References
Ahrens, C. 2007. Meteorology Today. Thomson Brooks/Cole, CA, USA. 537pp.
Busey, R., L. Hinzman, J. Cassano, and E. Cassano. 2008. Permafrost Distributions on
the Seward Peninsula: Past, Present, and Future. In Proceedings of the Ninth
International Conference on Permafrost 1: 215-220. University of Alaska, Fairbanks.
California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 2008. Technical Memorandum: Delta
Risk Management Strategy (DRMS) Phase 1. 43pp.
Cayan, D.,Bromirski, P., Hayhoe, K., Tyree, M., Dettinger, M., and Flick, R. 2006.
Projecting Future Sea Level. California Climate Change Center. CEC-500-2005-202-SF.
64pp.
Cayan, D., Bromirski, P., Hayhoe, K., Tyree, M., Dettinger, M., & Flick, R. 2008.
Climate change projections of sea level extremes along the California coast. Climatic
Change 87(0), 57-73. DOI: 10.1007/s10584-007-9376-7.
Cayan, D., M. Tyree, M. Dettinger, H. Hidalgo, T. Das, E. Maurer, P. Bromirski, N.
Graham, and R. Flick. 2009. Climate change scenarios and sea level rise estimates for the
California 2008 climate change scenarios assessment. California Climate Change Center.
CEC-500-2009-014-D, 62pp.
Center for Science in the Earth System (CIG). 2007. Preparing for Climate Change: A
Guidebook for Local, Regional, and State Governments. 186pp.
Climate Change Science Program (CCSP). 2007. Scenarios of Greenhouse Gas
Emissions and Atmospheric Concentrations (Part A) and Review of Integrated Scenario
Development and Application (Part B). A Report by the U.S. Climate Change Science
Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research [Clarke, L., J. Edmonds, J.
Jacoby, H. Pitcher, J. Reilly, R. Richels, E. Parson, V. Burkett, K. Fisher-Vanden, D.
Keith, L. Mearns, C. Rosenzweig, M. Webster (Authors)]. Department of Energy,
Office of Biological & Environmental Research, Washington, DC., USA. 260pp.
Climate Change Science Program (CCSP). 2008a. Impacts of Climate Change and
Variability on Transportation Systems and Infrastructure: Gulf Coast Study, Phase I. A
Report by the U.S. Climate Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global
Change Research. Savonis, M. J., V.R. Burkett, and J.R. Potter (eds.). Washington, DC:
Department of Transportation. 445pp.
Climate Change Science Program (CCSP). 2008b. Synthesis and Assessment Product
3.3: Weather and Climate Extremes in a Changing Climate. Regions of Focus: North
America, Hawaii, Caribbean, and U.S. Pacific Islands. A Report by the U.S. Climate

May 10, 2010

79

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research. Department
of Commerce, NOAA's National Climatic Data Center, Washington, D.C. 164pp.
Climate Change Science Program (CCSP). 2009. Coastal Sensitivity to Sea-Level Rise:
A Focus on the Mid-Atlantic Region. A report by the U.S. Climate Change Science
Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research. [James G. Titus
(Coordinating Lead Author), K. Eric Anderson, Donald R. Cahoon, Dean B. Gesch,
Stephen K. Gill, Benjamin T. Gutierrez, E. Robert Thieler, and S. Jeffress Williams
(Lead Authors)]. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington D.C., USA. 320pp.
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO). 2006.
Infrastructure and climate change risk assessment for Victoria. Report to the Victorian
Government. Australia. 177pp.
Department for Transport. 2004. The changing climate: its impact on the Department for
Transport. United Kingdom: Department for Transport.
http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/scienceresearch/key/thechangingclimateitsimpacto1909.
Diffenbaugh, N., J.S. Pal, R. J. Trapp and F. Giorgi. 2005. Fine-scale processes regulate
the response of extreme events to global climate change. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 102(44):15774-15778.
Ebi, K. and G. Meehl. 2007. The Heat is On: Climate Change & Heatwaves in the
Midwest. Pew Center on Global Climate Change. 20pp. Excerpted from the full report:
Regional Impacts of Climate Change: Four Case Studies in the United States.
http://www.pewclimate.org/docUploads/Regional-Impacts-Midwest.pdf
Frumhoff, P.C., JJ McCarthy, J.M. Melillo, S.C. Moser and D.J. Wuebbles. 2007.
Confronting Climate Change in the U.S. Northeast: Science, Impacts and Solutions.
Synthesis report of the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA). Cambridge
MA: Union of Concerned Scientists. 160pp.
GISS. 2009. Paleoclimate. http://www.giss.nasa.gov/research/paleo/
Grinsted, A., J. C. Moore, and S. Jevrejeva. 2009. Reconstructing sea level from paleo
and projected temperatures 200 to 2100AD. Climate Dynamics DOI:10.1007/s00382008-0507-2.
Hawkins, E. and R. Sutton. 2009. The Potential to Narrow Uncertainty in Regional
Climate Predictions. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. pp1095-1107.
Hayhoe, K., C. Wake, B. Anderson, X. Liang, E. Maurer, J. Zhu, J. Bradbury, A.
DeGaetano, A. Hertel, and D. Wuebbles. 2008. Regional climate change projections for
the Northeast U.S. In press, Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change.

May 10, 2010

80

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Hellmann, J., B. Lesht and K. Nadelhoffer. 2007. Chapter 2: Climate. In Hayhoe, K., D.
Wuebbles, and the Climate Science Team (eds). Climate Change and Chicago:
Projections and Potential Impacts. 33pp.
ICF International (ICF). 2007. The Potential Impacts of Global Sea Level Rise on
Transportation Infrastructure. Phase 1 – Final Report: the District of Columbia,
Maryland, North Carolina and Virginia. 16pp.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2000. IPCC Special Report
Emission Scenarios. Summary for Policymakers. 27pp.
IPCC. 2007a. Summary for Policy Makers. In: Climate Change 2007: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z.
Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds)]. Cambridge University
Press, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. 996pp.
IPCC. 2007b. Summary for Policymakers, In: Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [M...L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P.
Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E.Hanson, Eds.], Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA. 976pp.
Kelly, B.P., T. Ainsworth, D.A. Boyce, Jr., E. Hood, P. Murphy, and J. Powell. 2007.
Climate Change: Predicted Impacts on Juneau. 86pp.
Kirshen, P., C. Watson, E. Douglas, and A. Gontz. 2008. Appendix: NECIA coastal
impact analysis. 4pp. Appendix of Confronting Climate Change in the U.S. Northeast,
Science Impacts and Solutions (Frumhoff et al. 2007). .
Knutson, T., J. McBride, J. Chan, K. Emanuel, G. Holland, C. Landsea, I. Held, J.
Kossin, A. Srivastava, and M. Sugi. 2010. Tropical Cyclones and Climate Change.
Nature Geoscience 3:157-163.
Larsen, C.F., R.J. Motyka, J.T. Freymueller, K.A. Echelmeyer, and E.R. Ivins. 2004.
Rapid uplift of southern Alaska caused by recent ice loss. Geophysical Journal
International 158:1118-1133.
Larsen, P., S. Goldsmith, O. Smith, M. Wilson, K. Strzepek, P. Chinowsky, and B.
Saylor. 2008. Estimating Future Costs for Alaska Public Infrastructure at Risk from
Climate Change. Global Environmental Change, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.03.005.
16pp.
Lenihan, J., D. Bachelet, R. Neilson and R. Drapek. 2008. Simulated response of
conterminous United States ecosystems to climate change at different levels of fire

May 10, 2010

81

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

suppression, CO2 emission rate and growth response to CO2. Global and Planetary
Change 64(1-2):16-25
Leung, L., Y. Qian, X. Bian, W. Washington, J. Han and J. Roads. 2004. Mid-century
Ensemble Regional Climate Change Scenarios for the Western United States. Climatic
Change 62:75-113.
Lutgens, F. and E. Tarbuck. 2007. The Atmosphere. Pearson Prentice Hall, NJ, USA.
544pp.
Maurer, E.P., A.W. Wood, J.C. Adam, D.P. Lettenmaier, and B. Nijssen. 2002. A LongTerm Hydrologically-Based Data Set of Land Surface Fluxes and States for the
Conterminous United States. Journal of Climate 15(22), 3237-3251.
Maurer, E. P., L. Brekke, T. Pruitt, and P. B. Duffy. 2007. 'Fine-resolution climate
projections enhance regional climate change impact studies', EOS Transactions,
American Geophysical Union, 88(47), 504. CMIP3 data is available at:
http://gdodcp.ucllnl.org/downscaled_cmip3_projections/
Maurer, E.P. and H.G. Hidalgo. 2008. Utility of daily vs. monthly large-scale climate
data: an intercomparison of two statistical downscaling methods. Hydrology and Earth
System Sciences Vol. 12, 551-563.
Mote, P., A. Petersen, S. Reeder, H. Shipman and L. Whitely Binder. 2008. Sea Level
Rise in the Coastal Waters of Washington State. A report by the University of
Washington Climate Impacts Group and the Washington Department of Ecology. 11pp.
Mote, P., E. Salathe and C. Peacock. 2005. Scenarios of future climate for the Pacific
Northwest. Climate Impacts Group, University of Washington. 13pp.
Mote, P., and E. Salathe. 2009. Future Climate in the Pacific Northwest. Chapter 1 in The
Washington Climate Change Impacts Assessment: Evaluating Washington's Future in a
Changing Climate, Climate Impacts Group, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington. 23pp.
National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 2010. Sea levels online.
http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/sltrends
National Research Council of the National Academies (NRC). 2008. Potential Impacts of
Climate Change on U.S. Transportation. Transportation Research Board Special Report
290. Washington DC: Transportation Research Board. 298pp.
National Science and Technology Council (U.S.). 2008. Scientific assessment of the
effects of global change on the United States. Washington, D.C.: National Science and
Technology Council (U.S.), Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. 271pp.

May 10, 2010

82

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

New Zealand Climate Change Office (NZCCO). 2004. Coastal Hazards and Climate
Change. A Guidance Manual for Local Government in New Zealand. 1st edition. 2nd
edition revised by Ramsay, D, and Bell, R. (NIWA). Prepared for Ministry for the
Environment. Wellington, New Zealand. 156pp.
Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA). 2006. Climate change in the U.S.
Northeast: A Report of the Northeast Climate Impacts Assessments. Union of Concerned
Scientists, Cambridge, MA. 52pp.
Northeast Climate Impacts Assessment (NECIA). 2008. Climate Change Impacts and
Solutions for Pennsylvania: How Today’s Actions Shape the State’s Future. Union of
Concerned Scientists, Cambridge. MA. 62pp.
Ojima, D., J. Lackett, and the Central Great Plains Steering Committee and Assessment
Team. 2002. Preparing for a Changing Climate: The Potential Consequences of Climate
Variability and Change - Central Great Plains. Report for the US Global Change
Research Program. Colorado State University. 103pp.
Payne et al. (2004) as cited in U.S. Climate Change Science Program (USCCSP). 2009.
Transportation. In Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States. Second Public
Review Draft of the Unified Synthesis Product.
Pfeffer, W.T, J.T. Harper, S. O'Neel. 2008. Kinematic Constraints on Glacier
Contributions to 21st-Century Sea-Level Rise. Science 321(5894):1340-1343.
Rahmstorf, S. 2007. A Semi-Empirical Approach to Projecting Future Sea-Level Rise.
Science 315(5810):368-370.
Rohling, E.J., K. Grant, Ch. Hemleben, M. Siddall, B.A.A. Hoogakker, M. Bolshaw, and
M. Kucera. 2007. High rates of sea-level rise during the last interglacial period. Nature
Geoscience 1:38-42.
Salathe, E., R. Leung, Y. Qian, and Y. Zhang. 2009. Regional Climate Model Projections
for the State of Washington. Climate Impacts Group. 6pp.
Snover, A.K., L. Whitely Binder, J. Lopez, E. Willmott, J. Kay, D. Howell and J.
Simmonds. 2007. Preparing for Climate Change: A Guidebook for Local, Regional and
State Governments. In association with and published by ICLEI – Local Governments for
Sustainability, Oakland, CA. 186pp.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2009. US EPA Proceedings:
First National Expert and Stakeholder Workshop on Water Infrastructure Sustainability
and Adaptation to Climate Change. Arlington, VA.
http://www.epa.gov/nrmrl/wswrd/wqm/wrap/workshop.html

May 10, 2010

83

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Union of Concerned Scientists. 2009a. Confronting Climate Change in the U.S. Midwest:
Minnesota. 12pp.
http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming/science_and_impacts/impacts/climate-changemidwest.html
Union of Concerned Scientists. 2009b. Confronting Climate Change in the U.S. Midwest:
Missouri. 12pp.
http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming/science_and_impacts/impacts/climate-changemidwest.html
Union of Concerned Scientists. 2009c. Confronting Climate Change in the U.S. Midwest:
Indiana. 12pp.
http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming/science_and_impacts/impacts/climate-changemidwest.html
Union of Concerned Scientists. 2009d. Confronting Climate Change in the U.S. Midwest:
Wisconsin. 12pp.
http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming/science_and_impacts/impacts/climate-changemidwest.html
Union of Concerned Scientists. 2009e. Confronting Climate Change in the U.S. Midwest:
Ohio. 12pp.
http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming/science_and_impacts/impacts/climate-changemidwest.html
United States Global Change Research Program (USGCRP). 2000. Climate Change
Impacts on the United States, National Synthesis Team, Cambridge University Press.
537pp.
United States Global Change Research Program (USGCRP). 2009. Global Climate
Change Impacts in the United States, Thomas R. Karl, Jerry M. Melillo, and Thomas C.
Peterson, (eds.). Cambridge University Press. 196pp.
Walsh, J.E., W.L. Chaman, V. Romanovsky, J.H. Christensen, and M. Stendel. 2008:
Global climate model performance over Alaska and Greenland. Journal of Climate
21(23), 6156-6174.
Wood, A.W., L.R. Leung, V. Sridhar, and D.P. Lettenmaier. 2004. Hydrologic
implications of dynamical and statistical approaches to downscaling climate model
outputs. Climatic Change 62(1-3), 189-216.
Wuebbles, D. and K. Hayhoe. 2004. Climate Change Projections for the United States
Midwest. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 9(4):1381-2386.

May 10, 2010

84

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Yin, J., M. E. Schlesinger and R. J. Stouffer. 2009. Model projections of rapid sea-level
rise on the northeast coast of the United States. Nature Geoscience, 2(4), 262-266. doi:
10.1038/ngeo462.
Zervas, C. 2001. Sea Level Variations of the United States 1854–1999. NOAA Technical
Report NOS CO-OPS 36, 201pp.

May 10, 2010

85

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Appendix A.
A.1

Detailed Methodology

Identifying Relevant Climate Change Effects

The climate change effects determined to affect highway systems and discussed in this
report include changes in temperature and heat events, changes in precipitation and storm
activity, and sea-level rise. These variables are identified as potentially affecting
highways by a number of reports (NRC 2008; USGCRP 2009; CSIRO 2006; CIG 2007).
Changes in these climate variables may directly affect existing stressors or may introduce
new stresses on the highway system. For example, an increased number of heavy
precipitation events or the 1-in-100 year storm event (i.e., a storm event with a 1% annual
likelihood of occurring) may lead to flooding that cannot be handled by existing culverts
and other components of drainage systems. Temperature increases may affect regional
highway operations, affecting costs associated with snow and ice removal, as well as the
change in environmental impacts associated with salt and chemical use (NRC 2008).
Changes in precipitation may disrupt highway travel, construction activities, and
compromise bridge integrity (see Section 5 for detailed discussion of climate impacts
associated with these climate change effects). Additional variables, such as relative
humidity and changes in solar radiation, are also identified but not considered in this
report. Literature providing regional information for these variables is currently lacking,
but these variables should be included as future research allows.

A.2

Process of Analyzing Literature and Data

The compilation of regional projections began with a literature search using relevant,
carefully composed search terms across relevant databases of publications on the
environment, energy, technology, and government. The search was refined to include
articles, government reports, and peer-reviewed publications with a published date post2003 and available by June 2009. Effort was made to include seminal reports that became
available after this date. Since this report focuses on regional effects, studies that are
broader than the region-scale have been excluded. Sea-level rise studies are an exception,
as much of this cutting-edge work pertains to global-scale projections. Any reports that
used a data set from the same study are included as a group so that each primary data set
is only represented once in the matrix (i.e., not double-counted), thereby avoiding overemphasis on any one set of projections.
The climate projections provided in the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix
(Appendix C) were culled from studies of varying spatial and temporal scales, modeling
parameters, downscaling techniques, and modeling methodologies. This matrix organizes
the collected literature by U.S. region, time horizon, climate effect, and spatial coverage
with the following characteristics:
o The United States has been divided into regions based on a recent panelreviewed report (USGCRP 2009);
A‐1

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

o The studies are divided into three future time horizons as dictated by the
literature findings: as near-term represents 2010-2040, mid-century
represents 2040-2070, and end-of-century periods represents 2070-2100;
o The climate variables investigated are listed in the following order:
temperature, heat events, precipitation, storm activity, and sea-level rise;
o The USGCRP projection data sets for temperature and precipitation are
listed first, followed by the studies with the greatest regional coverage.
We find some results are closely clustered while others range widely, posing a challenge
for decision makers attempting to apply them. Attempts to streamline findings are further
complicated because many of the studies do not formally quantify likelihood.

A.3

Description of USGCRP Climate Projections

The bulk of the climate projections used in the regional temperature and precipitation
tables in Chapter 3 and used to develop the maps in Appendix B in this report are from
the CMIP3 database of climate model integrations by Michael Wehner of the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory for use in the 2009 USGCRP report, Climate Change
Impacts on the United States. The USGCRP data are based on a compilation of
aggregated climate model results for two IPCC Special Report Emission Scenarios. These
emission scenarios are based on ranges of projections of a number of societal changes,
such as changes in population, energy use, technological development, and unpredictable
societal behavior (IPCC 2007a; CCSP 2007). The lower emissions (B1) and the higher
emissions (A2) emission scenarios in this data set encompass a broad range of
possibilities; however, they do not span the full range of possible emissions scenarios. In
fact, current emissions rates are exceeding the A2 scenario. On the other hand, emissions
scenarios below B2 have been developed for reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, and are being considered in domestic legislation and international
negotiations.
This data set is an impressive collection of regional multi-model ensemble results. These
values are averaged for each region from the corresponding climate model grid cells in
the CMIP3 database. Using GCM-scale resolution is appropriate for this regional
projected information of mean conditions of temperature and precipitation.74 However,
the USGCRP report does not provide this information consistently for all regions. We
have attempted to be as consistent and quantitative as possible in our documentation of
these results to help facilitate comparisons between regions.

74

It should be noted that using the statistical downscaled data of CMIP3 database to provide regional results of mean
temperature and precipitation instead of the CMIP3 model results directly would introduce roundoff errors and possibly
additional sources of error. Statistically downscaled data are particularly informative when describing fine-scale
variability or extremes.

A‐2

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

This dataset uses the following global climate models for determining the results of the
A2 scenario (moderate-high emissions): ccsm3.0, cgcm3.1, cnrm, csiro, gfdl2.1, hadcm3,
hadgem1, inmcm3, ispl, miroc_medres, miub_echo, mpi_echam5, mri_cgcm2_3_2a, and
pcm. In addition to these models, the B1 scenario (low emissions) also includes results
from: bccr_bcm_2_0, gfdl2.0, giss_aom, iap_fgoals_0_g, miroc_hires. The one exception
is for Alaska, where a subset of top-performing global climate models was used: gfdl2.1,
mpi_echam5, cnrm, hadcm3, and miroc_medres.
In addition, this report also includes several national maps developed using downscaled
data. Statistical downscaling of the CMIP3 database was applied to the larger-scale gridsized climate models to provide finer-scale results of fine-scaled variability of means and
extreme conditions such as heat events that are provided in the figures of this report
(Hayhoe et al. 2008; Maurer et al. 2002; Maurer et al. 2008).75 This downscaling is
accomplished by first determining a statistical relationship between surface observations
and climate simulations of the past for each region. This statistical relationship is then
applied against the results of future climate simulations to provide fine-spatial projections
of mean and extreme thresholds of temperature and precipitation. See Wood et al. (2002)
for detailed description of this technique. Downscaled data is a useful tool for discussing
variability and extremes that are not well captured in climate models (USEPA 2009). It
should be noted that using the statistical downscaled data of the CMIP3 database to
provide regional results instead of the CMIP3 database itself would introduce roundoff
errors and possibly additional sources of errors.

A.4

Uncertainty

There is always some degree of uncertainty associated with model projections. The
Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix includes this information, when possible, in a
column labeled “certainty.” Modeling the climate system poses a number of challenges,
including understanding and representing the climate system’s processes and natural
variability, and estimating future emissions and uptake of greenhouse gases (IPCC
2007a).
There are various techniques used to address uncertainty, including probabilistic
approaches to quantify uncertainty, modeling various emission scenarios to produce a
wide range of future possibilities, comparing present-day model results with
observations, and engaging expert judgment to express uncertainty based on level of
agreement and amount of evidence (IPCC 2007a).
The IPCC assessments (e.g., Fourth Assessment Report (AR4)) and the U.S. Climate
Change Science Program (CCSP) Synthesis and Assessment Product (SAP) reports
provide some guidance regarding likelihood and confidence and how this information can
be used to filter and comprehend projected climate changes. Likelihood represents the

75

Downscaled data is a useful tool for discussing variability and extremes that are not captured well in climate models
(USEPA 2009). For access to these downscaled CMIP3 data, see Maurer 2007.

A‐3

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

assessed probability that the outcome will occur, and confidence characterizes the
consensus across modeling groups or experts that the projections are correct.
Table A-1 outlines the likelihood and confidence for climate variables most relevant to
the highway system: temperature rise, changes in precipitation, changes in frequency and
intensity of storm events, and sea-level rise.
These likely and very likely indicators provide measures of a portion of the uncertainty
and can act as a general guide in assessing the overall findings included in the Climate
Change Effects Typology Matrix. However, they do not account for uncertainty
associated with future emissions, uncertainty with downscaling techniques, uncertainty
associated with the uptake of greenhouse gases, or any systematic errors in the climate
models. Hence, the individual studies included in the Climate Change Effects Typology
matrix may not reflect the same level of confidence or likelihood as described in Table
A-1.

Climate variable
Temperature
Rise
Changes in
Precipitation

Annual mean
Seasonal mean
Extreme Heat Events
Annual mean
Seasonal mean

Change in frequency
and intensity
Intensification of storm events
Sea-level rise

Likelihood

Confidence

Very likelya
Very likely a
Very likely a
Very likelya,b
Very likely b

High confidencea
High confidence a
High confidenceb
Not found
Medium confidencec

Very likelyb

Not found

Likelyb
Cannot assess
likelihoodb

High confidence (extratropical)a
Not confident in upper bound of
SLRb

Table A-1: Likelihood and Confidence for Climate Variables Identified to Affect the Highway
System. aCCSP (2007); bIPCC (2007a); Very Likely refers to a greater than 90% probability; Likely
refers to a greater than 66% probability; High confidence represents an 8 out of 10 chance; Medium
confidence represents a 5 out of 10 chance.

This report quantifies key aspects of the temperature and precipitation projections in the
USGCRP dataset. The tables for each region describe the “mean,” the “likely” range, and
the “very likely” range for each of the three time frames addressed in this study. Those
terms are defined as follows:
o “Mean” – The mean range is the average of all of the simulations in the
lower emission scenario (B1) and the average of all of the simulations in
the higher emission scenario (A2). It is one number where the averages of
the simulations for the two scenarios are identical. The mean range is a
simple measure of the central tendency of the projections and the
uncertainty associated with future greenhouse gas emission rates.

A‐4

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

o “Likely” – The likely range is computed by first determining the standard
deviation for each scenario. Next, the values one standard deviation above
and below the average for each scenario are determined. Finally, the
minimum and maximum of these four values (i.e., two from each scenario)
are defined as the likely range. The range is a measure of the differences
(and uncertainty) associated with the models that were used, as well as the
uncertainty of future emission rates.
o “Very Likely” – The very likely range is computed the same way as the
likely range, except that two standard deviations are used instead of one.
Since the studies in the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix do not necessarily use
the same terminology for defining uncertainty, we have limited our use of the terms
“likely” and “very likely” in the report’s narratives to the aforementioned definitions.
In general, the model projections are more uncertain the further they are into the future. A
small range tends to be applicable for the near-term time horizon while a larger range of
plausible values is appropriate for the long-term. Transportation planners that are less
risk-averse may be more comfortable using the “likely” range, whereas planners that are
more risk-averse may prefer to use the “very likely” range.
Although the projections described in this report are available at the regional scale, some
care should be taken when applying them at regional or local scales. Given modeling
efforts currently underway, finer spatial-scale information is likely to become available
within the next few years.

A.5

Comparison of Projections Across Studies

The climate projections provided in the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix were
culled from studies of varying spatial and temporal scales, modeling parameters,
downscaling techniques, and modeling methodologies. As a result, some projections are
closely clustered while others range widely, posing a challenge for decision makers
attempting to apply them. Use of the findings is also complicated because many of the
studies do not formally quantify likelihood.
The climate projections contained in the Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix are at
a regional-scale or finer spatial resolution. Fine spatial resolution is not directly available
from global climate models with a typical grid cell distance varying in size from 50 to
250 miles. Downscaling techniques have been developed that transform the projected
climate effect at large-grid cell resolution into a fine-scale resolution of the order of 20
miles or less (NECIA 2006). Such techniques fall into two categories: statistical
downscaling and dynamical downscaling. Statistical downscaling determines a
relationship between the climate model output of a climate effect for a past 30- to 40-year
time period and the observed climate effect for the same time period. This relationship is
then used to downscale the projected climate model output for that particular climate
A‐5

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

effect. This approach is best when the determined relationship is robust over time; that is,
the processes governing the climate effect remain fixed with time. This may not always
be an appropriate method for downscaling precipitation projections (NECIA 2006).
Statistical downscaling is relatively quick and inexpensive. Dynamical downscaling uses
a regional model equipped with small-scale processes and local topography. The climate
model data are used as inputs around the boundaries of the regional model. Though this
process tends to be expensive and time-consuming, it does include dynamical changes in
response to large-scale forcing. Given the investment for this approach, dynamical
downscaled studies generally provide projections based on the results from a single
climate model.
The variation in attributes between studies creates challenges in developing a universal
methodology for drafting a regional narrative from the collected projections. Factors that
may vary between studies and that can be important when comparing their results include
the following:76
o Baseline reference years: The magnitude or percentage of climate change
is computed by comparing model simulations of future conditions with a
model’s baseline reference period. Therefore, differences in studies’
baseline reference periods (e.g., how they define “present day”) can
introduce unevenness in the amount of change that is reported.
o Simulation end point: Comparing the projections of model simulations
within the same time horizon can be problematic when the projections are
provided for a different set of projected years. This is generally
compounded when simulations also refer to varying baseline reference
years.
o Spatial extent of regions: The spatial extent of a region may be defined
differently across studies. For instance, one study may include only coastal
locations while another study may also include areas farther inland with
very different climate conditions. These differences can directly affect the
characteristics of the projected temperature and precipitation changes.
o Downscaling technique: The mechanism for downscaling varies between
studies. See previous description.
o Number of global climate models: Studies vary in the number of global
climate models used in the statistical downscaling. For example, the
USGCRP data provide averages based on the results from up to 19 global
climate models. Other studies, particularly intensive dynamical
downscaling studies, may use just one global climate model.
76

Not all modeling assumptions are provided in the “Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix” and therefore can be
problematic in efficiently comparing these studies. For example: studies may or may not account for greater degree of
ice melting when estimating sea-level rise or studies may or may not allow for evaporation when estimating
precipitation amounts.

A‐6

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

o Emissions scenarios: Most studies we examined tend to draw from four
IPCC scenarios: A1Fi, A1B, B1, and A2.77 They provide results from
climate simulations using those scenarios in a variety of ways. For
example, some provide the lower and upper limit of the projections
determined from climate model ensemble results, while others simply
provide the average.

A.6

Criteria for Data Selection in this Report

It is challenging to synthesize the array of projections provided by the Climate Change
Effects Typology Matrix into a narrative discussion that can assist in informing future
analysis of climate impacts on the highway system. The criteria used in this report for
determining whether a study would be included in the regional narratives of section 4
were guided by discussions with climate experts and are illustrated in Figure A-1. There
was a strong consensus for providing a plausible range of projections as opposed to a
point value. This range can be provided by studies using multi-model ensembles and
relevant emission scenarios (the B2 and A2 scenarios were suggested as the “lower” and
“higher” emission scenarios).78 Further, while a projection associated with a single
emission scenario for a multi-model ensemble study is acceptable for near-term
discussions, as there is not much variation of greenhouse gas emissions between emission
scenarios over this time frame, in this study we chose to use two emissions scenarios for
each of the three time frames.79 The projections are, however, affected by the choice of
emission scenarios for mid- to long-term projections, as the greenhouse gas emissions
increasingly diverge between emission scenarios with time and should be provided across
the range of low to high emission scenarios. Providing these ranges can arm
transportation planners with a set of plausible scenarios to apply, as warranted, in
determining the impacts on the highway system.
The USGCRP (2009) data meet the criteria established for incorporating a study into the
narrative: the study was conducted recently, it is a multi-ensemble study, it provides a
77

The IPCC developed four emission scenarios (A1, A2, B1, and B2) described in the IPCC Special Report on
Emissions Scenarios (SRES) associated with four plausible storylines representing varying degrees of economic,
regional, and environmental projected change as well as allowing for global integration. These studies tend to draw
from the following 4 IPCC SRES: A1Fi: very rapid economic growth based on per capita, global population peaking in
2050, rapid introduction of new and more efficient technology being fossil-intensive; A1B: very rapid economic
growth based on per capita, global population peaking in 2050, rapid introduction of new and more efficient technology
being evenly distributed between fossil and non-fossil technology; B1: rapid changes in economy though slower
growth than the A1 scenarios, same global population pattern as in A1, with new technology becoming clean and
resource-efficient; A2: slowest economic development of all the scenarios based on per-capita growth, has the highest
global population allowing for a continuous increase, with the slowest and most fragmented development.
78
It should be noted that this assumption assumes a somewhat linear relationship between greenhouse gas emissions
and changes in the magnitude of the climate variables; hence, it does not account for complexities such as tipping
points.
79
The issue of teasing out climate variability is particularly problematic in the near-term. For example, in the 2020s,
the regional precipitation projection for the Pacific Northwest was found to lie within the range of natural climate
variability, while regional projected temperature was outside of this natural range. The far-term projected temperature
variable was found to be far outside the natural range (Mote et al. 2005). This highlights the difficulty in distinguishing
between natural climate variability and the projected change.

A‐7

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

range of plausible scenarios based on low to moderately high emission scenarios, and the
dataset has been aggregated for each region using the CMIP3 database (see section A.3
for further description). In addition, this dataset is uniformly available for each region
and time horizon. Therefore, the USGCRP dataset is the primary source for annual
temperature, seasonal temperature, and seasonal precipitation. Annual precipitation is not
discussed in the narratives, as it averages out the important seasonal variations. One
exception of the application of the USGCRP dataset is Alaska. The Alaska projections
are based on the five climate models that are determined to be the top performers in
simulating temperature and precipitation (Walsh et al. 2008).
Any additional regional temperature and precipitation projections that meet the model
inclusion criteria are compared against the USGCRP projections. If the projections are
significantly different, the second set of information is provided. It should be noted that
this criterion for inclusion into the narrative tends to favor statistical downscaling results
over the intensive dynamical downscaling results.
Extreme events such as heat events, and changes in precipitation intensity, duration, and
frequency are provided regardless of how well a study meets the criteria discussed above.
These studies may use dynamical downscaling followed by multiple regional model runs
or intensive statistical downscaling.
Sea-level rise and storm surge projections are not
provided by the USGCRP data set. Global sea-level
rise studies are discussed at the beginning of Section 4
and are applicable across all regions. Studies that
account for regional-scale or local-scale changes in sea
level are discussed within the respective region.

Was the study
conducted recently
(e.g., post 2003)?
Does the study
include a number of
climate models
(optimum models if
identified for that
region)?

Does the study
include relevant
emission scenarios?

Was downscaling
applied to obtain
regional-scale or finer
results?

Include in Regional
Discussion
Figure A-1. Criteria for inclusion
of study into narrative regional
descriptions.
A‐8

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Appendix B.

Regional Maps

Maps of Temperature and Precipitation by Region
Attached in a separate document.

B‐1

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

Appendix C.

Climate Change Effects Typology Matrix

Typology Matrix Table by Region
Attached in a separate document.

C‐2

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies

C‐1

