International Practices on Climate
Adaptation in Transportation
Findings from a virtual review

Source: New Zealand Transport Agency

Synthesis Report — January 2015

Prepared for:
Federal Highway Administration
Office of Natural Environment
Washington, D.C.

Notice
This document is disseminated under the sponsorship of the Department of Transportation in the
interest of information exchange. The United States Government assumes no liability for the
contents or use thereof.
The United States Government does not endorse products or manufacturers. Trade or
manufacturers’ names appear herein solely because they are considered essential to the
objective of this report.

Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)

2. REPORT DATE

January 2015

3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED

Final Report

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

5a. FUNDING NUMBERS

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation: Findings from a Virtual
Review
6. AUTHOR(S)

5b. CONTRACT NUMBER

Gina Filosa and Alexandra Oster

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

DOT-VNTSC-FHWA-15-01

U.S. Department of Transportation
John A. Volpe National Transportation Systems Center
55 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02142-1093

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER

US Department of Transportation
Federal Highway Administration
Office of Natural Environment
1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE
Washington, DC 20590

FHWA-HEP-15-012

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

FHWA Project Leads: Tina Hodges and Rob Kafalenos

12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

This document is available to the public on the FHWA website at
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/publications_and_tools/

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)

The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) conducted an international review to study how international transportation agencies are
addressing issues related to adapting highway infrastructure to the impacts of climate change. The review involved transportation agencies
from Australia, Canada, Denmark, Korea, New Zealand, the Netherlands, Norway, and the United Kingdom. The review elicited information on
adaptation issues associated with all aspects of the transportation project delivery process. This synthesis report highlights the state of the
practice of how transportation agencies are addressing climate adaptation through the following: adaptation frameworks/strategies; climate
change risk assessments; selecting adaptation measures and strategies; long range planning and land use; changes in design standards;
maintenance and operations; asset management; and research. The information collected during the review and presented here is relevant to
transportation planners, asset managers, design engineers, and policy-makers.
14. SUBJECT TERMS

15. NUMBER OF PAGES

Climate Change, Adaptation

37

16. PRICE CODE
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF REPORT

Unclassified

NSN 7540-01-280-5500

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF THIS PAGE

Unclassified

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF ABSTRACT

Unclassified

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT

Unlimited
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18
298-102

Acknowledgments
The U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) in partnership
with the Volpe National Transportation Systems Center (Volpe Center) prepared this synthesis
report. The Volpe Center project team included Gina Filosa and Alexandra Oster of the
Transportation Policy and Planning Technical Center.
The Volpe project team wishes to thank Tina Hodges and Rob Kafalenos, the FHWA project
leads, for their guidance and support in conducting the virtual review and developing the report.
The team also thanks the Volpe Center’s Carson Poe for his time and expertise in reviewing this
document.
Lastly, the team also thanks representatives of the following international transportation
agencies who graciously shared their time, knowledge, and valuable insights (please see
Appendix C for a full list of agency representatives that were interviewed):
•

VicRoads, Victoria, Australia

•

New Zealand Transport Agency, New Zealand

•

Vejdirektoratet (Danish Road Directorate), Denmark

•

Rijkswaterstaat (Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment), Netherlands

•

Korea Expressway Corporation (KEC), Republic of Korea

•

Department for Transport, United Kingdom

•

Highways Agency, United Kingdom

•

Statens vegvesen (Public Roads Administration), Norway

•

Transport Canada, Canada

This report could not have been developed without the input from experts at these agencies.

Contents
List of Figures ........................................................................................................................ v
List of Tables ......................................................................................................................... v
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................ i
1.

Introduction ................................................................................................................... 1

2.

Adaptation Strategy........................................................................................................ 3

3.

Climate Change Vulnerability and Risk Assessment ......................................................... 8

4.

Long Range Transportation Planning and Land Use ....................................................... 12

5.

Integration of Climate Change into Design Practices ...................................................... 15

6.

Maintenance and Operations........................................................................................ 21

7.

Asset Management ....................................................................................................... 23

8.

Research....................................................................................................................... 25

9.

Conclusions .................................................................................................................. 28

Appendix A: Discussion Topics ............................................................................................. 29
Appendix B: Agency Snapshots ............................................................................................ 30
Appendix C: Interview Participants ...................................................................................... 33
Appendix D: Bibliography .................................................................................................... 35

List of Figures
Figure 1: Description of Delta Scenarios ....................................................................................................... 5
Figure 2: Highways Agency Adaptation Framework Model.......................................................................... 7
Figure 3: Collecting Well and Connecting Pipe ........................................................................................... 17
Figure 4: Length of Collecting Dish ............................................................................................................. 17
Figure 5: Retrofit of In-Service Bridges ....................................................................................................... 18
Figure 6: Causeway Upgrade Project Construction. Top Image: Existing Causeway Configuration in 2013.
Bottom Image: Final Causeway Configuration by 2017. ................................................................ 20
Figure 7: XGEO Web Tool ............................................................................................................................ 22

List of Tables
Table 1: Change in Precipitation Pattern .................................................................................................... 16
Table 2: Design Rainfall Generation Frequency (years) .............................................................................. 17

Executive Summary
Global climate change poses serious challenges to the transportation community. Climate change
effects, such as changes to long-term annual average temperatures and precipitation patterns,
increased frequency and intensity of storm events and heat waves, and rising sea levels, have direct
implications on the planning, design, construction, operations and maintenance of transportation
systems. In recent years, many transportation agencies in the United States have begun to assess the
risks that their transportation systems and operations face and the vulnerabilities that they have due to
climate change impacts. However, even the most proactive agencies are in the early stages of
developing and implementing adaptation strategies and are keen to learn from the experiences of
peers, including those internationally.
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) conducted a virtual international review to study how
transportation agencies worldwide are working to adapt highway infrastructure to the impacts of
climate change. The review team spoke with staff from the following agencies on adaptation issues
associated with all aspects of the transportation project delivery process, including policy development,
planning, design, construction, operations, and maintenance:
•

VicRoads, Victoria, Australia

•

New Zealand Transport Agency, New Zealand

•

Vejdirektoratet (Danish Road Directorate), Denmark

•

Rijkswaterstaat (Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment), Netherlands

•

Korea Expressway Corporation (KEC), Republic of Korea

•

Department for Transport, United Kingdom

•

Highways Agency, United Kingdom

•

Statens vegvesen (Public Roads Administration), Norway

•

Transport Canada, Canada

While there is considerable confidence in climate model estimates for future climate change, the exact
timing and magnitude of climate change effects as well as their precise impacts on roadway
infrastructure and logistics is uncertain. The uncertainty is related to unknown future emissions levels;
climate models limitations, and a lack of information on the degree of effectiveness of adaptation
strategies. Nevertheless, transportation agencies still must make decisions about and investments in
their road networks.
Key Findings and Observations
This synthesis report highlights proactive actions that international transportation agencies are taking to
address uncertainties connected to climate change and to manage the associated risks. The report
highlights the following state of the practice:
•

Adaptation frameworks/strategies: An adaptation framework or strategy is a foundation for an
organization to implement adaptive actions. It provides a sound basis for decision-making when
confronted with climate uncertainties. Several of the countries - included in the review – namely
Canada, Denmark, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, and the United Kingdom have
developed climate adaptation strategies and policies at the national level. Although the levels of

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | i

detail in these documents vary, common elements typically found include a brief description of
climate change predictions, an assessment of associated risks and/or vulnerabilities, and
identification of a process of how to address and respond to the risks and vulnerabilities. These
national strategies have in turn influenced the climate adaptation strategies their transportation
agencies have developed.
•

Climate change risk assessments: Several of the transportation agencies that participated in the
review are employing systematic methods to address some of the inherent uncertainties and to
manage the associated risk. The purpose of a climate change risk and/or vulnerability
assessment is to determine how climate change may impact an agency’s transportation assets
and prioritize measures to maximize impact and minimize costs. The Danish Road Directorate
follows the Blue Spot method – a four level analysis to identify roadway locations where the
likelihood of floods is high and the consequence of flooding is significant. Similarly, the
ROADAPT research project, a joint research effort supported by a number of European
countries, developed a preliminary risk assessment method that can identify vulnerable
locations in the transportation network, understand the probabilities and consequences that
climate change events could have on these locations, and provide options for adaptation
actions.

•

Changes being implemented in long range planning and land use processes: Incorporating
climate change impacts and climate data into long range transportation planning and land use
decisions can play a significant role in both mitigating and adapting to climate change. The
United Kingdom requires that applicants seeking approval for Nationally Significant
Infrastructure Projects must take climate change effects into consideration when planning the
facility’s location, design, construction, and operation. Similarly, the New Zealand Government
provides best practice information and guidance to local authorities on integrating climate
change considerations, including sea level rise, into land-use planning and decision-making
processes. The Guidance Manual includes specific recommendations for the degree of sea level
rise to consider.

•

Integrating climate change into design standards: Several international transportation agencies
have begun to integrate climate projections into design criteria and specifications for
transportation infrastructure projects. Examples include the Danish Road Directorate’s new
drainage standards, the Korea Expressway Corporation’s bridge design countermeasures, which
include requirements for new bridges to be designed for a 200-year return period (instead of a
100-year return period) and have a minimum freeboard of 2 meters. The agency is also adapting
in-service bridges at low elevation by either reconstructing them or raising their heights by 1 to
3 meters. The Norwegian Public Roads Administration also recently updated its planning, design
and construction manuals to integrate adaptation measures.

•

Maintenance and operations: Climate change impacts will likely necessitate changes in the ways
transportation agencies operate and maintain their systems and facilities. Some of the agencies
participating in the review are making minor changes to maintenance and operation activities,
though most indicated that they are not at the point where climate change impacts have
directly translated to changes in their maintenance practices. Examples of changes that agencies
are making include: increased field inspection of drainage systems; providing traveler
information to address weather-related safety; installing traffic safety and warning measures;
and improving emergency plans.

•

Asset management practices: Climate change impacts will likely alter transportation asset

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | ii

management investment cycles. Several of the transportation agencies included in the review
are actively integrating climate change considerations into their asset management plans.
Examples include the Korea Expressway Corporation’s new preventative slope management
strategy, which is designed to prioritize slopes for preventative maintenance and reduce the
amount of money spent on emergency relief, and the New Zealand Transport Agency’s Coastal
Effects Assessment Guideline, which outlines a simple, consistent, and comprehensive process
for asset managers to determine short- and long-term risks to state highway assets in the
coastal environment.
•

Research: Many of the transportation agencies included in the review are participating in
collaborative research initiatives that address critical information and data needs related to
climate change adaptation. These collaborative research efforts include two research programs
from the European Road Association that focus on climate change adaptation. The first effort,
Road Owners Getting to Grips with Climate Change, was designed to provide European road
authorities with the knowledge and tools necessary to "get to grips" with climate change and its
impacts on all elements of road management by adapting design rules, updating and improving
data collection, and developing risk management methods. The second program focused on
providing owners with adaptation technologies and the models and tools to support
decisionmaking concerning adaptation measures for road infrastructure.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | iii

1. Introduction
1.1 Background and Purpose
Global climate change poses serious challenges to the transportation community. Climate change
effects, such as changes to long-term annual average temperatures and precipitation patterns,
increased frequency and intensity of storm events and heat waves, and rising sea levels, have direct
implications on the planning, design, construction, operations, and maintenance of transportation
systems. Climate change adaptation is the practice of implementing actions to avoid, withstand, or take
advantage of current and projected climate changes and impacts. Adapting transportation infrastructure
to anticipated climate change impacts is critical to avoiding or at least minimizing potential damage,
disruption in service, and safety concerns.
In recent years, many transportation agencies in the United States have begun to assess the risks that
their transportation systems and operations face and the vulnerabilities that they have due to climate
change impacts. However, even the most proactive agencies are in the early stages of developing and
implementing adaptation strategies and are keen to learn from the experiences of peers, including those
internationally.
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) conducted a virtual international review to study how
international transportation agencies are addressing issues related to the adaptation of highway
infrastructure to the impacts of climate change, and to identify innovative and best practices that could
implemented in the United States to help advance the development and implementation of adaptation
strategies. The review involved nine agencies that were chosen based on their leadership in the climate
adaptation field. Agencies that participated in the review were:
•

VicRoads, Victoria, Australia

•

New Zealand Transport Agency, New Zealand

•

Vejdirektoratet (Danish Road Directorate), Denmark

•

Rijkswaterstaat (Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment), Netherlands

•

Korea Expressway Corporation (KEC), Republic of Korea

•

Department for Transport, United Kingdom

•

Highways Agency, United Kingdom

•

Statens vegvesen (Public Roads Administration), Norway

•

Transport Canada, Canada

The adaptation efforts for transportation infrastructure underway in these countries are diverse in
scope and application, reflecting a broad array of geographic, environmental, and societal conditions
much like those found across the United States.
The scope of the review corresponds with the wide-ranging and multidisciplinary implications of climate
change on transportation infrastructure. The review elicited information on adaptation issues associated

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 1

with all aspects of the roadway transportation project delivery process, including policy development,
planning, design, construction, operations, and maintenance. The compiled information presented here
is relevant to transportation planners, asset managers, design engineers, and policy-makers.

1.2 Methodology
The review team included staff from FHWA’s Offices of Natural Environment; Asset Management,
Pavements, and Construction; Bridges and Structures; and International Programs; and staff from the
Volpe National Transportation Systems Center. The review team determined which agencies to include
in the review using information from three primary sources: reports on prior related scanning studies;
published literature; and knowledge from experts in the field. Once the agencies were selected, the
review team reached out to an initial point of contact at each agency to identify appropriate point of
contact(s) who could participate in one, 1.5-hour web-based meeting. The review team provided each
interviewee with a list of discussion topics about which FHWA was interested in learning more (see
Appendix A).
The review team then conducted web-based meetings with each of the nine agencies. See Appendix C
for a list of interview participants. The format of the meetings allowed for discussion over the phone
with concurrent sharing of presentations and documents online. The review team conducted the
interviews between May and September 2014. Finally, the review team reviewed research reports and
official agency documents that the peer agencies provided in supplement to the information discussed
during the interviews (see Appendix D).

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 2

2. Adaptation Strategy
An adaptation strategy or framework is a foundation for an organization to implement adaptive actions.
It provides a sound basis for decision-making when confronted with climate uncertainties. Several of the
countries included in the review have developed climate adaptation strategies and policies at the
national level. These national strategies have in turn influenced the climate adaptation strategies their
transportation agencies have developed.
The following section highlights the adaptation strategies and frameworks for the agencies included in
the review who have established formal frameworks. Although the levels of detail in these documents
vary, common elements typically found include a brief description of climate change predictions, an
assessment of associated risks and/or vulnerabilities, and identification of a process of how to address
and respond to the risks and vulnerabilities.
Canada’s Federal Climate Change Adaptation Framework
Environment Canada developed a Federal Adaptation Policy Framework that guides the Government’s
domestic adaptation actions. This Framework sets out a vision, objectives, roles of the federal
government, and criteria for identifying adaptation priorities. The Framework identifies three key
themes to the Federal Government’s role in climate change adaptation:
•

Generating and sharing knowledge and building adaptive capacity to respond

•

Integrating adaptation into federal policy and planning

•

Using convening power to facilitate collaboration amount stakeholders and sectors

Building upon the Federal Framework, Transport Canada developed its first Climate Adaptation Action
Plan in 2013. The Adaptation Plan is the department’s first step in addressing and identifying gaps, risks,
and opportunities related to adaptation, and sets the stage for future action. The plan includes an action
plan that outlines goals and objectives that align with the Federal Framework, and identifies specific
actions that the department will take to achieve those goals.
Denmark: Strategy for Adapting to Climate Change
In 2012, the government of Denmark developed an Action Plan for a Climate-Proof Denmark, which
identified a series of initiatives that different government entities, including the Ministry of Transport
and the DRD, are conducting or have planned to ensure that the country will become more resilient to
climate change. Building off the overarching guidance and commitments in this plan, the DRD published
its Strategy for Adapting to Climate Change in 2013. The aim of this document is to ensure DRD takes
actions to address climate change in the most economically responsible and efficient manner. DRD’s
climate strategy is focused on road flooding, which is the agency’s central challenge associated with
climate change impacts. The DRD’s climate strategy involves a three-pronged approach to addressing
increased rainfall and water on roads: “we manage, we improve and we prevent.” DRD carries out this
approach as follows:
1. Manage flooding when it occurs. When flooding occurs, the DRD will close affected roadways,
provide information to warn motorists, and work to clear up incidents quickly.
2. Make improvement to roads. After a road flooding, DRD will analyze the event and conduct a
cost-benefit analysis to identify a financially viable improvement. As part of this work, the DRD is
developing a database of climate events in order to understand climate impacts at a national
level. The DRD has defined climate events as a “complete or partial closure of a national road, or

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 3

part of that road, for the duration of more than one hour, as a result of water on the road
surface.” Additionally, DRD is committed to cooperating with relevant authorities to better
coordinate activities and ensure they capitalize on opportunities to reduce risk.
3. Prevent wherever it is possible. The DRD has determined that it is not necessary or economically
feasible to prevent all climate events on the road network. In order to prioritize actions, the DRD
conducts Blue Spot Analysis to screens for particularly vulnerable areas (see Chapter 3 for more
information on the Blue Spot Analysis). The agency is also proactive about considering climate
change in the planning and construction phases in order to climate-proof – make more resilient
to climate change - new infrastructure.
DRD is now developing an action plan to carry out its climate change strategy. The action plan will
describe climate adaptation actions more fully and assign responsibility for implementation of these
actions.
The Netherlands Delta Programme
The Netherlands is a low-lying country that is vulnerable to flooding. The country’s Delta Act, which took
effect in 2012, requires a Delta Programme, which involves the development of yearly plans to protect
the country from high water and ensure a sufficient supply of freshwater. Since the Delta Programme is
designed to address future impacts, many of which are uncertain, Delta Scenarios were developed to
help manage the uncertainty. The four scenarios (see Figure 1) take the relationship between socioeconomic trends and climate change into account. The initial Delta Scenarios, which were developed in
2012, were based on the climate scenarios of the Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI). In
2014, the KNMI incorporated the latest insights into its scenarios. The changes were so slight that it was
not necessary to adjust the Delta Scenarios as they still corresponded to the range of plausible future
changes.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 4

Figure 1: Description of Delta Scenarios
Source: Delta Programme

The annual Delta Programme identifies measures and projects to adapt physical systems, such as dykes
and pumps, as well as spatial planning strategies (i.e. prohibiting construction in some locations, raising
structures in others, etc.) to proactively manage flooding. Delta Programme 2015 outlines final
proposals for addressing water safety and fresh water supply in the country. A key measure in the 2015
Programme is a new approach to water-safety standards. The new standards are based on a risk-based
approach, in which the risk of flooding and the possible consequences are taken together to determine
the safety standard level (the current approach only looks at a flood water level being exceeded). The
2054 Programme outlines three types of measures that will be implemented to manage flood risk:
•

Layer 1: preventive measures to limit the probability of a flood;

•

Layer 2: spatial organization of an area to limit consequences of a flood and, in specific cases, to
contribute directly to the desired level of safety;

•

Layer 3: disaster management to limit the consequences of a flood in terms of causalities.

The government aims to have the new water-safety standards embedded in law by 2017. The goal is to
have all flood defense systems meet the new standards by 2050. The Netherlands has a Climate Agenda
(2013) addressing both mitigation and adaptation aspects and plans to adopt a national adaptation
policy, which will be broader than infrastructure alone, by 2017.
New Zealand: State Highway Resilience Programme Business Case
New Zealand’s 2010 National Infrastructure Plan outlined New Zealand’s priorities for infrastructure and
highlighted future investments for all major sectors, including transportation. This plan also
acknowledged the need to consider climate change adaptation as part of the planning and development
process for new infrastructure projects. In the subsequent 2011 National Infrastructure Plan,
infrastructure resilience emerged as a guiding principle, driven in part by two major earthquakes in the
country’s Canterbury region. In the 2011 plan, the New Zealand Government set a new vision for
infrastructure, committing to create resilient infrastructure that is coordinated and contributes to

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 5

economic growth and increased quality of life. According to the plan, “the concept of resilience is wider
than natural disasters, and covers the capacity of public, private and civic sectors to withstand
disruption, absorb disturbance, act effectively in a crisis, adapt to changing conditions, including climate
change, and grow over time” (p. 14). Thus, in this plan, climate change adaptation is a way to achieve
resilience.
In response to the National Infrastructure Plan and several significant highway emergency events, the
New Zealand Transport Agency recently released a State Highway Resilience Programme Business Case.
This business case establishes the rationale for investment in a program of works to ensure the Agency
has the capacity to withstand, absorb, adapt to, and recover from disturbance and change conditions
and to grow over time as required to meet demands. The Business Case is focused on understanding
risks, such as those posed by sea level rise, and concentrating efforts on where the risk to the state
highway network is greatest. By 2017, the Transport Agency aims to have a national infrastructure
network investment and management approach to resilience, which will be incorporated into the 20182021 three-year National Land Transport Plan (New Zealand Transport Agency, 2014).
Norway: National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
In 2013, the Norwegian Parliament issued a national strategy for climate change adaptation, which
established a common framework for climate change adaptation across sectors and administrative
levels (Meld. St 33, 2013). The strategy emphasizes building scientific knowledge on which to base policy
decisions and strengthening that knowledge through collaboration across sectors and levels of
government. As a precautionary approach, the strategy recommends that assessments of the impacts of
climate change should be based on figures from the high end of the range of national climate
projections. The national strategy provided the Norwegian Public Roads Administration with the political
framework to advance its climate adaptation work.
United Kingdom: Highways Agency Climate Change Adaptation Strategy and Framework
The Climate Change Act of 2008 was the first major policy action that raised the profile of adaptation
work in the UK. The Government charged major infrastructure owners, including transport companies,
with assessing the risks to their assets and the operation of their assets to the projected changes in
climate. Infrastructure owners were required to submit climate change risk assessment information to
the Department of Environment, Food, and Rural Affairs. As an Executive Agency of a Government
Department, the Highways Agency was not required to report; however, it voluntarily agreed to report
information.
The Highways Agency published its Climate Change Adaptation Strategy and Framework in 2009. The
Framework lays out a strategic model to assessing and understanding the risks posed to the strategic
network. The model (see Figure 2) provides a platform for decision makers to examine their individual
business areas, including standards, specifications, maintenance, and the development and operation of
the Highways Agency network. It provides a process for identifying agency activities that are expected to
be impacted by climate change (defined as “vulnerabilities”), assessing associated risks and
opportunities, and determining the most appropriate actions to address and manage these risks.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 6

Figure 2: Highways Agency Adaptation Framework Model
Source: UK Highways Agency

Using the Adaptation Framework Model, the Highways Agency identified over 80 corporate activities
that may be affected by climate change. After conducting a preliminary appraisal of the risks associated
with these activities, the Highways Agency discovered that over 60 percent of the activities will likely be
substantially impacted by climate change and are thus time-critical. The Highways Agency prioritized
vulnerabilities based on a variety of criteria, including the extent and severity of the disruption a
climate-change event could cause. The Highways Agency then used this list of priorities to go through an
options analysis to determine the preferred option for dealing with the risks associated with each of the
vulnerabilities. Next, the agency moved forward with the development and implementation of
“Adaptation Action Plans” that outline the specific actions that need to be taken, who is responsible for
the actions, and the timeframe for carrying them out.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 7

3. Climate Change Vulnerability and Risk Assessment
While there is considerable confidence in climate model estimates for future climate change, the exact
timing and magnitude of climate change effects as well as their precise impacts on roadway
infrastructure and logistics is uncertain. The uncertainty is related to unknown future emissions levels;
climate models limitations, and a lack of information on the degree of effectiveness of adaptation
strategies.
Several of the transportation agencies that participated in the review are employing systematic methods
to address some of the inherent uncertainties and to manage the associated risk. The purpose of a
climate change risk and/or vulnerability assessment is to determine how climate change may impact an
agency’s transportation assets and prioritize measures to maximize impact and minimize costs. Risk
assessments often rely on both quantitative data and a qualitative analysis based on local knowledge of
vulnerabilities. The following section highlights the climate change risk assessment methods that
transportation agencies involved in the review are employing.
Denmark’s Blue Spot Project
The DRD’s Strategy for Adapting to Climate Change notes that it is neither necessary nor economically
feasible to prevent climate-related events across the entire national road network. Instead, the
Directorate applies the Blue Spot method to identify the locations on the national road network that are
most vulnerable to flooding and to determine whether improvements to those road sections are
economically viable. The Blue Spot analysis is a central activity that supports the agency’s goal of
achieving the highest degree of climate adaptation with available allocated resources.
A Blue Spot is an identified stretch of roadway where the likelihood of flooding is high (determined by
perception return patterns) and the consequence of flooding (quantified by socioeconomic factors, such
as safety, traffic management systems, and traffic intensity.) is significant. The Blue Spot method uses a
geographic information system (GIS)-model , comprised of three levels:
•

Level 1 provides a screening of all terrain depressions which are computed based on a
hydrologically adapted digital terrain model.

•

Level 2 produces a risk map by incorporating the amount of rainfall needed to fill a given
depression alongside the integration of the imperviousness of the catchment area.

•

Level 3 couples terrain characteristics with drainage system specifications in order to determine
depths and retention time of a flooding scenario. An important aspect of Level 3 is the
incorporation of climate factors, in terms of changing precipitation pattern, to enable model
outcomes from the present time and from the year 2050 and 2100. With this information the
model is able to identify Blue Spots in 2100 which may not exist under present day conditions.

The DRD uses the information from the Blue Spot analysis to inform funding decisions in terms of
prioritizing locations to address, as well as to inform adaptation actions for a specific location.
Nationwide the agency has identified 14 Blue Spots under present day scenarios, and an additional 35
Blue Spots have been identified for 2050 and beyond. The DRD compares the identified Blue Spots
against each other to determine where funding and adaptive measures should be targeted first and
most effectively. For individual locations, the agency also uses the Blue Spot analysis to conduct a costbenefit analysis to determine what should be done to address risk and consequence.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 8

Both the Swedish Transportation Agency and the Dutch Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment
have adopted the Blue Spot method to identify areas vulnerable to flooding. The results of the Dutch’s
analysis on the Dutch highway network was followed by an investigation of the risks of flooding and
further identification of critical assets. The results of this assessment were used to provide information
to the public in the case of major floods and to investigate the implications for evacuations and risk
management.
Roads for Today, Adapted for Tomorrow (ROADAPT)
The ROADAPT project was a joint research effort supported by the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark,
and Norway. The primary objective of ROADAPT was to develop a preliminary risk assessment method
that can identify vulnerable locations in the transportation network, understand the probabilities and
consequences that climate change events could have on these locations, and provide options for
adaptation actions. The outcome of ROADAPT was guidelines on:
A. The use of climate change projections
B. The application of a QuickScan on climate change risks for roads
C. How to perform a detailed vulnerability assessment
D. How to perform a socioeconomic impact assessment
E. How to select an adaptation strategy
The ROADAPT guidelines are available to download on the Conference for European Directors of Roads website.
Below is a description of guidelines B, C, and E.
Application of QuickScan
QuickScan is a climate change risk assessment method that provides preliminary estimates of the major
risks associated with weather conditions in the current climate and in future climate projections.
QuickScan does not use extensive quantitative analyses; rather, it is a semi-quantitative approach that
relies on stakeholder participation in a series of workshops to determine, consecutively:
1. Consequences,
2. Top risks and locations, and
3. An action plan for adaptation.
Workshop participants include experts in the fields of transportation, economics, roadway engineering,
and communications, as well as climate change specialists, engineers for specific threats, and road asset
owners. In a first workshop, participants establish a prioritized list of climate change impacts (i.e.
threats), climate parameters, and vulnerability factors. In a second workshop, participants identify
locations with high risk profiles and map them according to risk. In a third and final workshop,
participants develop an action plan that outlines a prioritized list of strategies to address the threats.
The action plan incorporates details as to the life span of the road segments, and whether the action is
for adaptation versus regular maintenance.
By engaging stakeholders in the process, the QuickScan method increases awareness about climate
change impacts, starts team building among key players, and creates a mutual understanding of future
actions.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 9

Vulnerability Assessment
The ROADAPT vulnerability assessment outlines a three-step process for each threat identified in the
previous risk assessment. Step one identifies factors that are a prerequisite for the threat to occur and
factors that affect the level of vulnerability. In step two, the vulnerability factors are assigned a
vulnerability score and incorporated into geographic information system (GIS) layers. In step three, the
vulnerability factors are indexed and mapped to identify areas of varying degrees of vulnerability for a
particular threat.
Selecting Adaptation Strategies
The ROADAPT Guideline for Selecting Adaptation Strategies includes guidance on identifying and
selecting appropriate adaptation strategies to address and minimize risk associated with climate change
impacts. The guideline outlines an 11-step approach that road owners can use to generate a set of
policies or best strategies across a network. The 11 steps in the method are:
1. Identify the road owners’ needs.
2. Identify the damage mechanisms, design models, and climate parameters.
3. Assess the resilience of the asset in the current situation.
4. Assess the resilience of the asset in the future situation.
5. Identify adaptation measures using the ROADAPT adaptation measures database.
6. Establish adaptation policies.
7. Assess consequences of measures using the ROADAPT adaptation measures database.
8. Select adaptation strategies.
9. Identify stakeholders to be involved.
10. Identify knowledge gaps in climate change projections, technologies and essential data.
11. Develop technology roadmaps for upcoming adaptation technologies.
The ROADAPT Guideline for Selecting Adaptation Strategies includes a database of over 500 adaptation
measures for geotechnical and drainage assets, pavements, and traffic management. The measures
cover a range of categories including planning, construction, legislation, maintenance and management,
traffic management, capacity building, monitoring, and research. The measures fall within five stages:
pro-action, prevention, preparation, response, and recovery.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 10

Highlights from National and Agency Level Assessments
UK Department for Transport (DfT), Transport Resilience Review
In 2014, the DfT commissioned an independent review of the transport network’s ability to cope with
extreme weather. The review examined the primary challenges that prolonged adverse and extreme
weather presents to the transport industry and how the challenges are currently being addressed. The
plan assessed impacts to each transport mode, including the strategic and local road network, the
national rail infrastructure network, and airports and ports of economic and strategic importance, as well
as issues common across modes. Based on the evidence gathered, the review team developed 63
recommendations for actions to improve the resilience of the UK’s transport network, many of which are
short-term actions that can be taken immediately.
Climate Change Risks to Australia’s Coasts: A First Pass National Assessment and Climate Change Risks
to Coastal Buildings and Infrastructure- A Supplement to the First Pass National Assessment
In late 2009 the Australian Government released the first national assessment of climate change risks to
Australia’s coastal assets. The report provided an analysis of the location and number of residential
properties that are at risk of inundation from rising sea levels and erosion as a consequence of climate
change. The supplemental report provides additional data on the exposure of commercial buildings, light
industrial buildings, and transport systems (road, rail, tramways) in Australia’s coastal areas. The
assessment focuses on impacts and risks at the end of the century and provides a plausible worst case
scenario to assess risk. The results of the assessment are intended to inform dialogue on a national
approach to manage risk in the future.
Infrastructure and Climate Change Risk Assessment for Victoria
The Victorian Government commissioned a study to examine the likely impacts of climate change on
Victoria’s infrastructure, including water, power, telecommunications, transport and buildings, identify
the categories of infrastructure most at risk, and identify opportunities for adaptation (CSIRO, 2007). The
report describes a worst-case scenario for low and high climate change projections for the years 2030
and 2070. For each infrastructure category, the report outlines the likely impact of climate change on
infrastructure services (the infrastructure itself and its functions), social amenity (including health and
public response), governance and the costs of maintenance, repair, and replacement. The report also
considers several adaptation responses, including change in design standards, materials selection,
planning, and maintenance regimes.
Adapting to a changing climate: Norway’s vulnerability and the need to adapt to the impacts of
climate change
From 2008-2010, the Norwegian government conducted a study to identify the impacts of and
vulnerabilities towards climate change on Norway’s natural environmental and society, and to identify
measures to reduce vulnerabilities and increase resilience. The report, which was published in 2010,
found that while Norway has high adaptive capacity in many areas, the lack of maintenance and repair in
key infrastructures and fragmentation in the natural environment increases vulnerability towards climate
change. The study recommends three overarching principles for climate change adaptation:
•

A comprehensive approach to adaptation that assesses the effects of greenhouse gas emissions,
pollution, and the natural environment should always be taken when adaptive measures are
planned.

•

Management of the natural environment must have an ecosystem-based approach.

•

Adaptation must be integrated into regular planning processes.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 11

Highlights from National and Agency Level Assessments (continued)
New Zealand’s National Land Transport Programme
In 2008-2009 the New Zealand Transport Agency completed Research Report 378 (Gardiner, et al. 2008,
2009), a two-stage project that identified and assessed the impacts that climate change may have on
New Zealand’s land transport network. The report provides recommendations, including adaptation
options, to address identified information gaps and risks. The Stage Two report deals with regional
effects of climate extremes on the networks, and considers how these vary by region, when and where
these risks emerge and which parts of the land transport networks are most at risk. Existing data from
infrastructure providers was used to assess the current vulnerability of networks to extreme weather.
Extrapolation was used to predict future effects based on modelling of climate extremes for 10-, 50and 100-year projections using a mid-range (A1B) scenario. Regional impacts were determined from GIS
maps by overlaying climate change predictions with transport infrastructure. Priority adaptation
responses are discussed for each national profile in the context of design, operation, research and
policy issues, and related emerging climate change research.
The New Zealand Transport Agency aims to have a national infrastructure network investment and
management approach to resilience in place by 2017 to include in the 2018-2021 three year National
Land Transport Plan (New Zealand Transport Agency, 2014). To achieve this resilience approach goal,
over the next three years the Transport Agency will complete a risk assessment to determine where
funding is required and feasible for adaptation works via the National Land Transport Plan. This
assessment will identify priority corridors and critical points and associated risk treatment work that
meet funding criteria. The Agency intends to allocate budget in the 2018-2021 National Land Transport
Plan to carry out the works identified.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 12

4. Long Range Transportation Planning and Land Use
Incorporating climate change impacts and climate data into long range transportation planning and land
use decisions can play a significant role in both mitigating and adapting to climate change. Even though
transportation and land use decision-making often occur at the local and/or regional level, the examples
featured below, illustrate how different countries have been able to integrate climate change
considerations into national and state policies and procedures to inform and guide transportation and
land use planning processes.
United Kingdom National Road and Rail Networks National Policy Statement
The UK passed its Planning Act 2008 to improve and accelerate the process for developing major
infrastructure projects, deemed Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects, including as roads, ports,
energy facilities, and large-scale hazardous waste infrastructure. The Act tasked the Government with
creating National Policy Statements for different types of national infrastructure development projects
(transport, energy, water, wastewater, and waste) to provide guidance on how to assess and mitigate
the impacts of large-scale projects. To date, nine National Policy Statements have been released
regarding Energy, Ports, Waste Water, and Hazardous Waste. The statements lay out the Government’s
objectives for the development of nationally significant infrastructure, and outlines information on how
the policy takes into account mitigation of and adaptation to climate change.
The Department of Transport issued a Draft National Road and Rail Networks National Policy Statement
in December 2013 and the final version of the policy will be completed soon. This policy stipulates that
applicants seeking approval for Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects must take climate change
effects into consideration when planning the facility’s location, design, construction, and operation.
More specifically, the policy requires that for transport infrastructure that has safety critical elements,
the applicant should apply the high emissions scenario (high impact, low likelihood) to those elements
critical to the safe operation of the infrastructure (Section 4.35).
New Zealand Guidance for Local Governments
There are locations along the New Zealand’s state highway network that have been identified as being
vulnerable to sea level rise. The New Zealand Ministry for the Environment’s Coastal Hazards and
Climate Change: A Guidance Manual for Local Government in New Zealand provides best practice
information and guidance to local authorities on integrating climate change considerations, including
sea level rise, into land-use planning and decision-making processes. The Guidance Manual includes
specific recommendations for the degree of sea level rise to consider. For planning and decision
timeframes out to the 2090s, the Guidance Manual recommends:
1. a base value sea-level rise of 0.5 m relative to the 1980–1999 average be used, along with
2. an assessment of potential consequences from a range of possible higher sea-level rise values.
At the very least, all assessments should consider the consequences of a mean sea-level rise of
at least 0.8 m relative to the 1980–1999 average.
For longer planning and decision timeframes, the Guidance Manual recommends an additional
allowance for sea-level rise of 10 mm per year beyond 2100 (New Zealand Ministry for the Environment,
2008). The Ministry for Environmental has recently commenced a review and update of this guidance
manual.
See Chapter 5 for more information on how the New Zealand Transport Agency integrates this sea level
rise planning recommendation as part of transportation project design.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 13

Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
In the State of Victoria, Australia, land use planning and development appeals go through the Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal, 2014). Historically, this tribunal has
not factored in climate change in terms of permitting decisions related to development in coastal areas.
However, in recent years, as climate change has emerged as a pressing issue especially pertaining to
planning and environmental decision-making, the Tribunal has begun to take into account climate
change impacts in reviewing development applications. In numerous decisions, the Tribunal has rejected
development applications or refused planning permits due to the potential risk and damage that would
be caused by flooding, rising sea levels, and storm surge associated with climate change (University of
Melbourne, 2010a). In other instances, the Tribunal has only allowed development to move forward if
certain conditions are met related to mitigating the impact of climate change (University of Melbourne,
2010b). While the Tribunal’s decision-making authority only applies to the State of Victoria, it has
sparked a change within Australia in terms of how climate change factors into State and local land use
and development. Additionally, permitting decisions pertaining to VicRoads planning and development,
as well as local and private transportation suppliers, could potentially be impacted by this move toward
more fully tackling climate change impacts.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 14

5. Integration of Climate Change into Design Practices
Engineering design standards govern many aspects of a transportation system – from roadway
geometrics and bridges and structures to erosion, sediment control, and hydraulics. Design standards
are based on the amount of risk that an infrastructure owner is willing to accept for that infrastructure
to physically be damaged or fail or to fail to provide a certain level of function/service. Transportation
engineers have traditionally relied on historical records of climate, especially extreme weather events,
when designing highway systems to meet these design standards. Most transportation infrastructure is
built to last for 50 years or longer. Confronted with climate change, past conditions may not reliable
indicators of future conditions, thus potentially bringing into question whether the magnitudes of
extreme weather events based on historical records truly represent the amount of acceptable risk or, in
other words, meet the design standards that have been set at the time of design. This suggests that
climate projections/trends should inform or be incorporated into the design process to allow for
adjustment of the magnitude of the flows to meet the design standard over the actual service life of the
infrastructure, particularly in cases where the remaining service life is long and climate trends are
projected to change.
Some transportation engineers in the U.S. have been reluctant to modify designs to promote resilience
to future environmental conditions due to uncertainties in climate projections, as well as a lack of usable
climate data at the scale (i.e. local and regional level) needed to base engineering and design
requirements. Despite facing similar challenges, several international transportation agencies have
begun to integrate climate projections into design criteria and specifications for transportation
infrastructure projects. The following sections highlight best practice examples from the agencies
included in the review.
Canada’s Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) Engineering Protocol
Since 2005, Engineers Canada has been leading a project in Canada in partnership with Natural
Resources Canada to complete a national engineering vulnerability assessment of existing and planned
public infrastructure to the impacts of climate change. One outcome of the project is a formalized
assessment procedure or tool, known as the PIEVC Engineering Protocol. The Protocol is a five step
process to analyze the engineering vulnerability of an individual infrastructure to current and future
climate parameters, such as extreme heat or rainfall. It includes an estimate of the severity of climate
impacts on the components of the infrastructure (i.e. deterioration, damage or destruction) to enable
the identification of higher risk components and the nature of the threat from the climate change
impact. This information can be used to make informed engineering judgments on what components
require adaptation as well as how to adapt them. The Protocol has been applied in 24 case studies of
infrastructure located across Canada (Engineers Canada, 2013).
Danish Road Directorate Drainage Standards
The Danish Road Directorate bases its climate predictions on the A1B scenario from the IPCC. Based on
this scenario, annual rainfall in Denmark is predicted to increase by 11 percent by 2050 and by 22
percent by 2100. In addition, the number of days experiencing more than 20mm is projected to increase
from two to five days by 2050 and seven days by 2100. The increase in precipitation levels and rates
increases the risk of floods that exceed the capacity of the drainage infrastructure.
The DRD recognizes that integrating climate considerations into the design and construction of a project
is less expensive than having to adapt a project at a later stage. As such, the agency continuously
analyzes and updates road regulations to account for the changes in climate. In addition, for a

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 15

considerable time now, the agency has made a standard practice of planning new roads away from
locations that have a high risk of flooding or by creating structures with higher barriers.
Current design standards require that infrastructure be built to withstand a 25-year return period for
precipitation. Under current conditions, a 25-year return period corresponds to 58 mm of rain. Analysis
by the Danish Meteorological Institute predicts that in 2100, a 25-year event will equal 74 mm of rain. At
present, this amounts to a 100-year event (see Table 1).
Table 1: Change in Precipitation Pattern
Source: Danish Meteorological Institute
Present
time

Return
pattern

Return
pattern
2050

Return
pattern
2100

Mm

Years

Years

Years

45

5

2

1

47.5

10

5

2

54.6

20

10

5

58

25

20

10

65.2

50

25

20

74

100

50

25

97.3

500

100

100

142.8

1000

500

500

The agency employs a cost-benefit approach to determine the appropriate adaptation response. For
example, a number of emergency pumps are located across the country to alleviate road flooding. Based
on the Blue Spot analysis, the agency is, as an example, planning to increase the number and capacity of
pumps at road stretches particularly prone to flooding in order to ensure that roads are re-opened as
quickly as possible and that material damage is kept to a minimum.
Korea Expressway Corporation
Climate change impacts on the Korean Peninsula are expected to entail more frequent heavy rain and
typhoon events, stronger winds, greater flooding, heavier snowfall, and higher average temperatures
(Korean Meteorological Administration, 2013). The KEC is taking steps to improve its design criteria to
protect transportation infrastructure against these anticipated changes.
•

Strengthened Design Rainfall Generation Frequency: In 2000, KEC required culverts and drainage
pipes to be built to accommodate a 25-year precipitation event. Beginning in 2006, the KEC now
requires that in mountainous areas these drainage facilities be built to accommodate a 100-year
event (see Table 2).

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 16

Table 2: Design Rainfall Generation Frequency (years)
Source: Korea Expressway Corporation

~2000

2000-2002

2003-2005
(flatland)

2006
(mountain area)

Culvert and Drain pipe

25

25

25-50

100

Frontage road and adjacent area
drainage
(V-shaped, U-shaped, ridge)

5

10

10

20

3-5

5

10

20

Drainage Type

Surface and slope drainage
(dyke, head race)

•

Increased safety factor for slope stability: Safety factors for slope stability describe the structural
capacity of a system on a slope. In order to improve and strengthen slope stability, KEC has
increased the required design factor of safety from 1.1 to 1.2.

•

Improved function of drainage facilities: The KEC has made improvements to its design criteria
to improve the ability of drainage facilities to collect water. These improvements included
requiring a higher superelevation of curved sections (increased from 0 to 6 percent); increasing
the width of the collecting well (from 1.0m to 1.4m) and the diameter of the collecting ditch
(from 600 millimeters (mm) to 1,000 mm); and increasing the length of collecting ditches (from
2.4 m to 3.5 m) (see Figure 3 and Figure 4).
Figure 3: Collecting Well and Connecting Pipe
Source: KEC

Figure 4: Length of Collecting Dish
Source: KEC

•

Increased concrete strength: In order to protect structures from salt damage caused by an
increased use in de-icing materials, the KEC increased the concrete protection of concrete used
on small-sized bridges. The concrete strength was increased from 24 megapascals (MPa) to over
30 MPa. This increased strength also helps to protect the structures against frost damage.

•

Employed bridge design countermeasures: Flooding has major impacts on bridges, including
overflow and inundation, scour of foundations, debris accumulation on bridge piers, and
deterioration and failures. To address an anticipated increase in flooding intensity and
frequency, the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport and KEC are employing new
hydraulic design requirements for new bridges. Starting in early 2000s, KEC required new
bridges to be designed for a 200-year return period. The agency also increased the minimum
freeboard from 1 to 2 meters. KEC has also increased bridge opening sizes and flow capacity by
raising required span lengths. Where possible, KEC has begun locating bridge piers and

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 17

foundations outside of main channels. The agency is also taking steps to adapt in-service bridges
at low elevation, regardless of their size, by either reconstructing them or raising their heights
by 1 to 3 meters (see Figure 5). Concrete piers and abutments are now reinforced with more
steel to ensure that the raised bridges meet the requirements for stiffness and strength.
Figure 5: Retrofit of In-Service Bridges
Source: Korea Expressway Corporation

Norwegian Public Roads Administration
In recent years, the Norwegian Public Roads Administration reviewed existing manuals that defined
agency requirements for planning, design, operation, maintenance and management of the road
network to determine necessary changes to account for climate change impacts. Examples of adaptation
measures integrated into the planning, design and construction manuals include:
•

Guidelines require 200-year flood level as design level for road elevation. Sea level rise and
increasing storm surge levels must also be taken into account (Manual N100, Road and Street
Design).

•

It is strongly recommended to plan for drainage solutions that cover a larger area and includes
alternative flood ways, retention ponds, and protective ditches on slopes and cuts.

•

A climate factor (greater than 1 but not of fixed value) has been introduced as a safety factor, in
the procedure for calculating the necessary capacity of culverts and drainage pipes. The formula
used to calculate the necessary drainage capacity (Q) is Q = C x I x A s Kf, where
C = runoff factor
i = design rainfall intensity (l/s x ha)
A = runoff area (hectare)
Kf = climate factor
The standard formula to calculate drainage includes a number of uncertainties, including
uncertainties in rainfall frequency curves and in determining the runoff factor, all of which are
enhanced by climate change. Introducing a climate factor helps to address the additional
uncertainty when calculating drainage capacity.

•

The design requirement for bridges, including design of erosion protection and free height over
water, is the 200-year flood water levels and flood loads. It is also recommended to perform a
risk analysis with respect to 1000-year flood conditions in order to avoid catastrophic

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 18

consequences, such as loss of life or loss of the
entire structure.
•

Climate change aspects have been included in the
model used for comparing landslide risk for roads
and prioritizing protections measures. In addition,
three new guidelines have been published that
reflect climate change risks: for protections
against rock fall, for managing snow avalanches,
and for “wet” landslides, i.e. slush avalanches and
debris flow.

UK Department for Transport
The UK Department for Transport’s Highway Agency is
moving away from relying solely on historical weather for
design considerations and is beginning to integrate
climate change considerations into its design standards.
For example, the Highway Agency has adopted the Enrobé
à Module Élevé Class 2 (EME2) pavement standard where
appropriate. EME2, which is based on French practice, has
a higher cost but it is more resilient to high loads under
higher temperatures.
The Highway Agency also addressed climate change
impacts in recent revisions to highway drainage standards
in its Design Manual for Roads and Bridges (HD 33 and HD
45). The design manual includes the following guidance
regarding detailed design of pavement drainage:
Allowance for climate change: The rainfall
intensities used to calculate the design storms
must include an allowance for the effects of
climate change. Where rainfall data exclude such
an allowance, a sensitivity test on the design of
the drainage system must be carried out by
increasing rainfall intensities of the design storm
by 20 percent.
As part of the next iteration of drainage standards, the
agency is considering an allowance for a 30 percent
increase in rainfall intensities of the design storm. This
demonstrates the agency’s commitment to ensuring that
its infrastructure is able to withstand the changing climate
over its expected lifetime.

Project Case Study:
High Speed Two (HS2)
H2S is the UK Government’s proposal for
a new, high speed north-south railway
that will connect London to Leeds and
beyond. As part of the environmental
impact assessment for the project, the
project sponsor conducted a high level
climate change risk and resilience
assessment to identify the potential
risks of climate change on the proposed
project. The assessment considered
climate-related hazards such as extreme
hot and cold weather, heavy rain, high
winds, and storms posed to the
infrastructure and assets associated with
the proposed project. The assessment
identified two high risk areas: (1) flood
of track work, cuttings and tunnels, and
(2) overheating in tunnels. To mitigate
these risks, the project design
incorporated resilience design
measures. To address the potential risk
of flooding, all operational infrastructure
and assets are protected by a one meter
freeboard above the 1 in 1,000 year (0.1
percent) annual probability of flooding.
The one meter freeboard provides
increased protection to allow for flood
risk modeling uncertainty. In addition,
the railway drainage will be designed to
accommodate storms up to the 1 in 100
year (1 percent) annual probability of
flooding , including an increase of 30
percent for climate change allowance
(Department for Transport, 2013).

New Zealand Transport Agency
As previously highlighted, the New Zealand Ministry for the Environment recommends specific sea level
rise values that agencies should consider as part of the planning process. The New Zealand Transport
Agency incorporated this sea level rise planning recommendation as part of the design for the SH16
Causeway Upgrade Project. The Causeway is a key part of the Western Ring Route – one of the country’s

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 19

seven roads of national significance. As part of the project the Causeway is being raised to reduce
flooding during extreme tidal conditions (see Figure 6).
Figure 6: Causeway Upgrade Project Construction. Top Image: Existing Causeway Configuration in 2013.
Bottom Image: Final Causeway Configuration by 2017.
Source: New Zealand Transport Agency

The New Zealand Transport Agency’s Bridge Manual (3rd Edition) also requires consideration of climate
change impacts in the design of bridges and culverts. Specifically, the manual states:
Design for climate change effects: Where it is practical and economic for a bridge or culvert
structure to be retrofitted at a later date to accommodate increased flood flows arising from the
effects of climate change, the structure need not initially be designed to accommodate
increased flood flows arising from the effects of climate change. Where future retrofitting is not
practical or does not reflect value for money, future climate change impacts shall be taken into
account in the design.
Finally, the New Zealand Transport Agency’s state highway environmental plan (2008) includes an
objective to manage increased hazards of climate change impacts on state highway infrastructure. The
plan states that “in factoring in climate change adaptation into design, consider the following:
•

the intended design life of the infrastructure and whether climate change impacts may
manifest within the intended design life; and

•

whether future-proofing the design is required so later retro-fit is feasible and cost-effective.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 20

6. Maintenance and Operations
Climate change impacts will likely necessitate changes in the ways transportation agencies operate and
maintain their systems and facilities. Some of the agencies participating in the review are making minor
changes to maintenance and operation activities, though most indicated that they are not at the point
where climate change impacts have directly translated to changes in their maintenance practices.
However, nearly all interviewees believed that such changes – conducting more frequent maintenance
of pavement, for example – would likely occur.
The following is a summary of the changes to maintenance and operation activities that the countries
included in the review have already made as a result of changes in climate.
Increased field inspection of drainage systems
Several agencies, including the DRD, UK Highways Agency, and New Zealand Transport Agency, noted an
increased emphasis on the need to inspect and improve drainage systems to ensure that they are being
maintained properly and meet the appropriate levels of service. The need for increased field inspection
and maintenance of drainage systems is particularly important for areas that are potentially vulnerable
to flooding. It is vital for such systems to run at optimal levels to mitigate any flooding that may be
associated with increased precipitation levels or higher intensity precipitation events.
Provision of traveler information to address weather-related safety
Several agencies have expanded efforts to provide travelers with better information in order to
minimize weather-related traffic incidents. The DRD for example operates and maintains a road-user
information center that, through collaboration with the Danish Meteorological Institute, provides
information about flooding through its traffic information services, including its website and mobile
telephone applications. The agency also coordinates with Danmarks Radio, the country’s national
broadcasting corporation to provide information on road mobility problems, including those caused by
flooding. Similarly, the KEC has increased efforts to provide traveler information. In 2010, Korea’s
Meteorological Administration launched Weavigation, which provides drivers with weather forecast
information at their current location, destination, and for the route to the destination. The information
is sent directly to drivers’ navigation systems, social network services, and variable message signs.
Weather data such as precipitation, temperature, humidity, road surface temperature, and wind speed
and direction is collected and updated every minute from roadside weather sensors. In addition, current
weather, weather forecast, severe weather alerts, and interactive radar images are also sent to drivers.
Drivers can refer to the service when they choose and change their own paths; however the information
is not fully integrated into automatic route guidance.
Installation of Traffic Safety and Warning Measures
The KEC has enhanced traffic safety measures to adapt to changes in climate conditions. In recent years,
Korea has experienced an increase in the occurrence of severe, localized winds and an increase in the
intensity of typhoons. To minimize safety impacts to motorists, the KEC has implemented speed limit
restrictions or full closures on long-span bridges under strong wind conditions (i.e. when 10-minute
average wind speed measured using anemometers on the bridge is above 25 m/s, the bridges are closed
to traffic). The agency has also installed mesh wind screens on smaller-scale bridges in order to reduce
the velocity of crosswinds. Road management agencies in Korea are also monitoring vulnerable slopes
for avalanches and land/mudslides in real time through closed caption televisions or sensors installed on
the slopes. These warning systems automatically notify the appropriate experts at the responsible
agencies via mobile phone.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 21

Improved Emergency Plans
The Norwegian Public Roads Administration developed a system for “stepwise preparedness” for
readiness against avalanches, floods, and other natural hazards. The agency uses the system to outline
recommended preparedness levels during challenging weather situations. Specific tasks and
responsibilities are outlined for the four preparedness levels: green, yellow, orange, and red.
The Public Roads Agency, in collaboration with the Norwegian National Rail Administration, Norwegian
Water Resources and Energy Directorate, and the Meteorological Institute, developed a web portal tool
– www.xgeo.no – to assist with preparedness, monitoring, and forecasting of floods, landslides, and
avalanches. XGEO is a map centric tool for visualizing temporal and spatial data from various data
sources. The tool shows historical daily maps of the snow conditions, interpolated weather observations
and numerical predictions (which are based on European atmospheric models), gridded water balance,
and climate means and anomalies. It also includes data from real-time weather point observations from
300 weather stations as well as webcams. The tool also provides access to real-time observations of
avalanches, including observations from professional avalanche observers, public observers, and
observers from the rail and road authorities (see Figure 7)(specific information about each avalanche or
flood incident through a separate registration system). The weather and climate data is overlaid on
administrative data, such as rail and road infrastructure.
Figure 7: XGEO Web Tool

Map depicting avalanche activity for the past 200 days in a subarea of Norway.

The Norwegian Public Roads Administration has also developed an improved template for emergency
plans for natural hazards, which it is integrating into all operation contracts. The plan includes more
elaborate use of weather data and map-based information concerning flood and landslides for the
specific area of road that the contractor is responsible for maintaining. By providing more detailed
information the agency hopes to encourage proactive management, such as prioritizing culverts to clean
in advance of anticipated heavy rain, in order to mitigate issues.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 22

7. Asset Management
Transportation asset management is a strategic and systematic approach to effectively managing
transportation infrastructure through its life cycle. It focuses on business and engineering practices for
resource allocation and utilization, with the objective of better decisionmaking based upon quality
information and well-defined objectives.
Climate change impacts will likely affect transportation asset management investment cycles. The
following section highlights examples on how transportation agencies are actively integrating climate
change considerations into their asset management plans.
Korea Expressway Corporation Risk-Based Slope Management
The KEC manages approximately 8,400 slopes (cut-slopes higher than 5 meters) across its roadway
network. Each year the country experiences casualties and property damage due to slope failures and
debris flow caused by typhoons and heavy rain events. The KEC inspects approximately three percent of
these slopes annually through its general inspection process, programming funding for slope
maintenance activities based on the results of the inspection and evaluation. However, the agency has
found that in extreme weather events related to climate change, damages have occurred on nontargeted slopes. As a result the agency has had to invest funding in emergency relief to restore these
damaged slopes rather than perform maintenance activities on the programmed slopes. Since the
agency does not have the capacity and financial resources to inspect all slopes simultaneously, it has
focused on early detection and preventive maintenance to reduce risk and damage caused by slope
failures.
In 2011, the KEC instituted a new preventive slope management strategy in order to reduce the amount
of money spent on emergency relief. As part of this strategy, the KEC now performs basic and in-depth
surveys and prioritizes investments in a five-year cycle. In order to prioritize slopes for preventative
maintenance, the agency conducts a debris flow risk assessment process. The debris flow risk
assessment process involves four steps:
•

Risk assessment scope definitions – identify the risk location and risk area

•

Hazard analysis – identify risks based on the hydrologic and geologic character of the region and
the damage range

•

Consequence analysis – analyze the facilities affected and vulnerabilities

•

Risk assessment – conduct both a qualitative and quantitative evaluation based on hazard and
consequence

The risk assessment results in a score from 0–30 and a corresponding risk grade of S, A, B, C, D, and E
that is based on the likelihood of damage occurring during different rainfall frequency events. A risk
grade of “S,” for example, is defined as damage that may occur in a 2–5 year rainfall event; whereas a
risk of grade of “D” is defined as damage that may occur in a 1,000-year rainfall event. The risk
assessment helps to inform design considerations for risk mitigation and asset management decisions.
The KEC is also developing an accountable, reliable database of the effectiveness of preventative slope
management activities to help ensure the quality of preventive investment decisions.
New Zealand’s Coastal Effects Assessment Guideline
The New Zealand Transport Agency manages its state highway infrastructure in accordance with the

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 23

State Highway Asset Management Plan (NZTA, 2014), which requires assets to be regularly checked for
dependability to ensure they perform as required. The Asset Management Plan also discusses risk to the
networks and its impact on customer service and transport efficiency including long term issues such as
climate change effects.
To assist staff with assessing infrastructures’ existing and future dependability, the Transport Agency
developed a draft Coastal Effects Assessment Guideline, outlining a simple and consistent process for
asset managers to determine short- and long-term risks to state highway assets in the coastal
environment. The Guide provides a systematic way to collect information on risks to assets and the
surrounding coastal environment, both short- (up to 10 years) and long-term (50–100 years), and
considers these across a section of the network, rather than at individual locations. By taking a
comprehensive approach to assess and record coastal environmental risks management,4 approaches
can be adapted to differing scenarios and consider wider issues than just the structural integrity of an
asset (Grieg, et al 2014).The Guide also emphasizes making decisions on what work to prioritize based
on the magnitude of the risk, and provides documentation to support a business case for the actions
identified, which is required for all Agency projects to be approved and funded. The Transport Agency is
currently testing the Guide in determine its usefulness in real-world settings before refining and
finalizing it.
The New Zealand Transport Agency is also working with regional councils who have taken an active role
in looking at regional risk issues and consequences. Joint approaches that are inclusive of major
stakeholders are aimed at improving overall resilience of regional networks focused on an
understanding of past and recent events and looking forward at climate change effects.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 24

8. Research
Many of the transportation agencies included in the review are participating in collaborative research
initiatives that address critical information and data needs related to climate change adaptation. The
following section showcases these research initiatives.
ERA-NET Road
Since 2006, the European Road Administrations have shared their road research priorities and budgets
to organize transnational research programs that cover a range of topics. In 2008, the Conference for
European Directors of Roads (CEDR) initiated ERA-NET ROAD, its first cross-border funded research
program. The National Road Administrations in the following 11 countries funded the program: Austria,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Ireland, The Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Spain, Sweden, and the UK. The
goal of the research program, titled “Road Owners Getting to Grips with Climate Change,” was to
provide European road authorities with the knowledge and tools necessary to "get to grips" with
climate change and its effects on all elements of road management by adapting design rules,
updating and improving data collection, and developing risk management methods. The 2008
program funded four research projects (see below). Information about each of the four projects,
including a summary of results and implementation strategies, is available in the Final Report of ERANET ROAD Programme “Road Owners Getting to Grips with Climate Change:
•

IRWIN - Improved local winter index to assess maintenance needs and adaptation costs in
climate change scenarios: The main objective of IRWIN is to develop an improved local road
winter index, which is sufficiently detailed and comprehensive so that road authorities and
owners can use it to assess the implications of future scenarios and climate change implications,
and perform reliable cost/benefit analyses. The project collected ten years of observations from
50 road weather stations in Sweden and 49 stations in Finland. Maintenance actions from the
regions of interest were available as well, and were used in the final winter index calculations.
The resulting IRWIN observational database provides a better understanding of local weather
variations and a clearer representation of weather and climate of the road network.

•

P2R2C2 - Pavement Performance & Remediation Requirements following Climate Change: The
P2R2C2 project investigated the likely impacts of climate change in Europe, from the Alps and
northwards, on the moisture/ice conditions in the pavement and the subgrade, and the
consequential pavement material behavior and pavement response to traffic over a 100-year
timescale. The project found that the life cycle of the pavement is much less than the time span
over which climate change will have a statistically dependable influence on pavement
performance. At present, road designers only need to change their practice for the pavements
with the longest life or for the lower layers that may not be touched during future rehabilitation
and reconstruction. The appropriate responses to these changes in pavement performance will
be achievable, in most cases, by routine material formulations that can be employed at the next
reconstruction/rehabilitation event. However, some responses will require engineers to develop
new design criteria regarding temperature and return period of storm flows (regionally specific)
and to pay more attention to drainage systems, particularly to make them self-cleaning and
easily inspectible. In addition, actions to improve future pavement performance will likely
include stabilization of unsealed pavements, overlaying by bound layers or operational
management solutions based on continuously monitored condition,

•

RIMAROCC - Risk Management for Roads in a Changing Climate: The RIMAROCC method is a risk
management-based framework or decision support for road owners dealing with climate

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 25

change. The project developed the RIMAROCC framework to facilitate the production of a Risk
Management Study by or for a road authority. The method can be used to mitigate threats,
reduce vulnerabilities and minimize the consequences of an event. The RIMAROCC Framework
consists of seven steps each with a number of sub-steps:
1. Context Analysis
2. Risk Identification
3. Risk Analysis
4. Risk Evaluation
5. Risk mitigation
6. Implementation of an Action Plan
7. Monitoring, Review & Capitalization
•

SWAMP - Storm Water prevention–Methods to predict damage from water stream in and near
road pavements in lowland area: The SWAMP project addresses the critical issue of finding the
parts of the road network that are most vulnerable to flooding, using GIS as a basis. The project
developed the Blue Spot concept: a chain of procedures that can be used by road owners,
operators or consultants to systematically analyze, adapt and protect the road network with
respect to flooding (see Chapter 3 for more details on applying the Blue Spot concept). The
project also identified the crucial issues to consider when creating national or even regional
guidelines for inspections and maintenance of Blue Spots.

CEDR Research Program
In 2012, CEDR (European Road Directors organization) initiated a second call that built upon the first
ERANET call for a research program on climate change. The second call focused on providing owners
with adaptation technologies and the models and tools to support decisionmaking concerning
adaptation measures for road infrastructure. The climate change research program was funded by
Denmark, Germany, Norway, and the Netherlands. The program call resulted in two projects, which are
currently underway:
•

ROADAPT: Roads for Today, Adapted for Tomorrow: The ROADAPT project, which was
highlighted in previous chapters, provides integrated, more detailed, and hands-on methods
and tools to be used within the RIMAROCC framework in a transnational setting (see Chapter 3
for more details on the ROADAPT project).

•

ClipDaR: Design guideline for a transnational database of downscaled Climate Projection Data
for Road impact models: The project will focus on the review, analysis, and assessment of
existing regional Climate Change projections regarding transnational highway networks needs.

Infrastructure Slopes – Sustainable Management and Resilience Assessment
The UK Highways Agency is partnering with academic institutions, infrastructure owners, and
engineering companies on the Infrastructure Slopes – Sustainable Management and Resilience
Assessment (iSMART) project. The purpose of the project is to create a visualized model of transient
water movement in infrastructure slopes under a range of current and future environmental scenarios
based on a fundamental understanding of earthwork material and system behavior (Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council, 2014). The results of the study will provide decision-makers with a
better understanding of the interactions between earthwork, vegetation, and climate, which is needed

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 26

in order to develop robust guidance on which maintenance approaches should be adopted and how
they should be applied.
Transport Canada’s Northern Transportation Adaptation Initiative
Transport Canada's Northern Transportation Adaptation Initiative is designed to improve understanding
of climate impacts and facilitate better and more integrated transportation planning and adaptation
measures. As part of the Initiative, Transport Canada provides funding support to territorial
governments and non-profit organizations to conduct research and development activities related to
the design, development, and adoption of innovative technologies and best practices. This work will
help make existing and future northern transportation infrastructure and operations more resilient and
adaptable to climate change. To support the delivery of the research and development activities, two
networks for experts from government, academia, and the private sector were established: the
Permafrost Network and the Network of Expertise on Transportation in Arctic Waters.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 27

9. Conclusions
The activities of the international transportation agencies included in this review offer valuable insights
into how to transportation agencies globally are beginning to adapt infrastructure to anticipated climate
change impacts. While the geographic, environmental, and societal conditions of the agencies in the
review may differ in some ways to those of transportation agencies in the United States, they face many
of the same challenges. For all agencies, the cost of adapting the transportation network to climate
change is much greater than the funding currently available for adaptation. Additionally, each agency
faces similar uncertainties in terms of climate models, unknown future carbon emission levels, and the
timing and extent of anticipated impacts. However, the transportation agencies included in the review
are taking proactive actions to address the inherent uncertainties and manage the associated risks.
Many of the agencies have established formal strategic frameworks for addressing climate change
adaptation and have identified processes to address and respond to these risks. The most proactive
agencies have comprehensively examined the risks and vulnerabilities of the transportation network to
climate change impacts and are employing systematic methods to identify and prioritize measures to
maximize their effectiveness while minimizing costs.
Several agencies have also begun to employ specific adaptation measures, particularly in terms of
integrating climate change considerations into the planning and design of projects. Those agencies that
are modifying design practices acknowledge that in some cases it is more economically responsible to
climate proof infrastructure during the construction phase than to adapt in the future during the
operational phase. Changes to the planning and design of projects are primarily associated with
drainage systems, bridges, and culverts. Some of the agencies included in the review referenced using
passive adaptation options that use the natural environment to protect transportation infrastructure,
such as through protecting wetlands, barrier islands, or other natural features. However, while the
transportation agencies recognize that climate change impacts will have implications on maintenance
and operations, few are making changes in maintenance practices at this point in time.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 28

Appendix A: Discussion Topics
1. Evolution of Policy: Overview of how your agency has reached where it is today with respect to
climate adaptation planning or action. What laws, regulations, or policies guide or influence
your work on climate change? How has climate change influenced the allocation of funds in your
agency?
2. Climate Data: Where do your climate projections come from and how do you translate this
information into a level of detail that is usable by transportation engineers and planners? For
which variables do you have useful projections and which not?
3. Uncertainty: How do you deal with the multiple layers of uncertainty inherent in adapting to
climate change (uncertainties regarding emissions levels, climate sensitivity, timing and extent
of impacts, effectiveness of adaptation strategies, future demographic and economic conditions,
etc.)? In the United States, we have found that engineers are sometimes reluctant to change the
design process because of uncertainties in climate projections, a lack of usable data at the scale
they need, and the fact that assets are already engineered to withstand extreme events. How
have you dealt with this?
4. Integration of Climate Data into Design: Please provide examples of how you have integrated
climate projections into design criteria and specifications of specific transportation
infrastructure projects.
5. Costs and Benefits: Have you analyzed the costs and benefits of particular adaptation options at
the project level and can you provide examples? Please describe any tools you have used for this
process.
6. Ecosystem Services: What opportunities have you found to build in adaptation options that use
the natural environment to protect the transportation facility, such as through protecting
wetlands, barrier islands, or other natural features?
7. Long Range Transportation Planning and Land Use: How have you incorporated climate data
into long range transportation planning and land use decisions?
8. Operations and Maintenance: Are you maintaining your transportation systems differently due
to changes in climate or do you plan to do so in the future?
9. Asset Management: If you have an asset management system, are climate change impacts
considered with regard to asset management investment cycles and if so, how?
10. Research, Training, and Communication: Are you funding or conducting any research or training
on improving the resilience of transportation to climate change? If so, please describe. Is there
recognition among the public, senior officials, and staff of the need for climate adaptation? How
do you communicate with internal and external stakeholders regarding climate adaptation?

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 29

Appendix B: Agency Snapshots
VicRoads, Victoria, Australia
Agency Overview: VicRoads is an agency under
the Department of Transport, Planning and
Local Infrastructure within the State
Government of Victoria. VicRoads plans,
develops, and manages over
22,000 kilometers (km) of roads (including
freeways, highways, major arterials),
approximately 3,200 bridges, and more than
4,500 other structures. The roads, which
amount to approximately 20 percent of those
in Victoria, carry 80 percent of the State’s
traffic.
Projected Climate Impacts for Victoria: Victoria is
a coastal state with diverse environmental
regions, including wet, temperate climates
and semi-arid plains. The anticipated climate
change impacts in Victoria are: higher
temperature; increase in the number and
intensity of hot days (over 95⁰); decrease in
average number of frost days; decrease in
annual average rainfall by 4% by 2030; an
increase risk of drought, and increase in
heavy rainfall intensity in the summer and fall
(Victorian Government Department of
Sustainability and Environment, 2008). Under
most scenarios, projected sea level rise by
2030 for Victoria is approximately 0.2 meters
(m). By 2100, projected sea level rise ranges
from 0.8 m and 1.4 m. (Sinclair Knight Merz,
2012).
New Zealand Transport Agency, New Zealand
Agency Overview: The New Zealand Transport
Agency manages nearly 11,000 km of
highways in New Zealand. The Agency’s state
highways carry 50 percent of traffic vehicle
miles and 75 percent of heavy traffic vehicle
miles traveled, and provide vital connections
to much of New Zealand’s 83,000 km of local
roadways. NZTA also runs the Roads of
National Significance Programme, which
focuses on reducing congestion, improving
safety, and spurring economic growth
through the implementation of seven major

infrastructure projects within or adjacent to
New Zealand’s five major population centers.
Projected Climate Impacts for New Zealand: New
Zealand anticipate the following changes as a
result of climate change: higher
temperatures; rising sea levels; more
frequent extreme weather events such as
droughts and floods; a change in rainfall
patterns; an increase in the intensity of
severe storms; and, an increase in storm
surge levels (New Zealand Ministry for the
Environment).
Vejdirektoratet (Danish Road Directorate),
Denmark
Agency Overview: The Danish Road Directorate
(DRD) oversees approximately 3,800 km of
highway and main state roads. These roads
account for approximately 5 percent of the
total road network in Denmark in length, but
control 50 percent of the total traffic.
Projected Climate Impacts for Denmark: The DRD
bases its future projections on climate
scenario A1B from the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The Danish
government recently released guidance that
all government levels use this scenario to
make climate projections. The A1B model is
corrected for local effects using models from
the Danish Metrological Institute. One of the
primary anticipated changes from climate
change in Denmark is increased rainfall. The
A1B scenario predicts that annual rainfall will
increase 11 percent by 2050 and 22 percent
by 2100. Also, the number of days with
precipitation greater than 20mm is projected
to increase to more than 4 days by 2030, 5
days by 2015, and 7 days by 2100.
Rijkswaterstaat (Transportation and Water
Infrastructure Agency), Netherlands
Agency Overview: Rijkswaterstaat is part of the
Dutch Ministry of Infrastructure and the
Environment. It is responsible for the design,

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 30

construction, management, and maintenance
of the main infrastructure facilities in the
Netherlands. In this, Rijkswaterstaat aims at a
good balance between economy,
environment and quality of life.
Rijkswaterstaat responsibilities include the
main road network, the main waterway
network, and the main water systems. The
main road network includes 3,046 km of
motorways, 1,428 km of access and
connecting roads, 2,749 viaducts, 22 tunnels,
and 743 bridges.
Projected Climate Impacts for The Netherlands:
The Netherlands anticipates more storms and
heavier rainfall due to global climate change.
The country also projects sea level rise
between 20 centimeters (cm) and 85 cm by
2100.
Korea Expressway Corporation (KEC), Korea
Agency Overview: KEC, one of Korea's major
government-invested corporations, is a
competent authority for national expressway
system in Korea. KEC currently manages
3,790km of expressway network.
Projected Climate Impacts for Korea: Based on
Korean Meteorological Administration’s
reports on climate change, climate change
will have a variety of impacts on the Korean
Peninsula, including an increase in
temperature, a reduction of winter period, an
increase in extreme typhoons, heavier
snowfall, and an increase in heavy rainfall.
Annual precipitation days are projected to
decrease, whereas the annual number of
heavy rain days and the amount of rainfall is
projected to increase.
Department for Transport and Highways Agency,
United Kingdom (UK)
Agency Overview: The UK Department for
Transport is a ministerial department,
supported by 21 agencies and public bodies
that include all modes of transportation. The
Department is responsible for providing
policy, guidance, and funding to English local
authorities to help them run and maintain
their road networks, improve passenger and

freight travel, and develop new major
transport schemes. The agency also sets the
strategic direction for the rail industry and the
ports and establishes national aviation policy.
The Highways Agency, which is under the
Department for Transport, is responsible for
the trunk roads and major strategic routes in
England. These roads represent less than 3
percent of the country’s total roadways, but
carry the vast majority of traffic (a third of all
traffic and two thirds of all UK freight).
Projected Climate Impacts of the UK: The UK’s
Met Office produces probabilistic climate
change projections for the country. The most
recent information, the UK Climate
Projections (UKCP09), predicts increased
temperatures for all areas of the UK, an
increase in the number of days with high
temperatures, a reduction in the number of
frost days, an increase in the amount of
winter rainfall, and a decrease in summer
precipitation. Sea level rise is projected to be
between 12 and 76 cm for the period 1990–
2095. Sea level rise coupled with more
frequent storm surges may increase flood risk
(United Kingdom Highways Agency, 2009).
Statens vegvesen (Public Roads Administration),
Norway
Agency Overview: The Norwegian Public Roads
Administration plans, builds, operates, and
maintains national and county roads in
Norway. The road network includes 10,446km
of national roads and 44,333km of county
roads.
Projected Climate Impacts for Norway: Projections
for Norway show that the climate can be
expected to change considerably: mean
temperature will increase; sea level could rise
between 500-100cm; and storm surges will
increase correspondingly. The average annual
precipitation in Norway is expected to
increase, and more days with heavy
precipitation and higher average amounts of
precipitation are also expected during all
seasons (Norwegian Ministry of the
Environment, 2010).

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 31

Transport Canada, Canada
Agency Overview: Transport Canada has
jurisdiction over aviation and marine
transportation, major railways, and
interprovincial and international bridges and
tunnels. Canadian provinces and territories
have jurisdiction over intraprovincial
transportation, including roads and bridges.
Projected Climate Impacts for Canada: Canada has
experienced increases in temperatures and
annual precipitation. The frequency and
severity of extreme weather events, such as
heat waves, droughts, and floods, will
increase as a result of climate change. The
country also anticipates reduced Artic ice
cover and loss of permafrost. Climate changerelated risks to coastal areas in Canada
include coastal inundation, increased stormsurge flooding, and shoreline erosion
(Government of Canada, 2014).

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 32

Appendix C: Interview Participants
VicRoads, Victoria, Australia
Simon Renton
Team Leader, Climate Change and Adaptation
New Zealand Transport Agency, New Zealand
Rob Hannaby
Environment and Urban Design Manager
Highways and Network Operations

Vanessa Browne
Principal Environmental Specialist
Highways and Network Operations

Danish Road Directorate, Denmark
Christian Axelsen
Department of Research and Development

Marianne Grauert
Specialist Coordinator, Climate and
Environment

Rijkswaterstaat, Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, Netherlands
Onno Tool
Senior Advisor
Rijkswaterstaat

Thomas Bles
Project Coordinator ROADAPT
Deltares

Kees van Muiswinkel
Senior Advisor, Climate and Infrastructure
Rijkswaterstaat

Arjan Venmans
Senior researcher, transportation
infrastructure
Deltares

Per Danielsson
Swedish Geotechnical Institute, SGI
Korea Expressway Corporation, Republic of Korea
Dr. Sung-min Michael Cho
Head (Director)
Strategy & Policy Research Division

Dr. Seongkwan Mark Lee
Senior Researcher
Strategy & Policy Research Division

Dr. Heungbae Gil
Research Director
Structures Research Division

Hosik Yoo
Senior Manager
SMART Highway R&D Division

Department for Transport, United Kingdom
Dean Kerwick-Chrisp
Sustainability, Equality and Diversity
Highways Agency

Miles Gidlow
Transport Resilience Review
Department for Transport

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 33

Public Roads Administration, Norway
Gordana Petkovic
Climate and Transport, Program Manager
Public Roads Administration

Tore Humstad
Data Collection and Processing
Public Roads Administration

Transport Canada, Canada
Elizabeth Smalley
Sustainable Transportation and
Adaptation Team
Transport Canada

Kathy Palko
Policy Advisor
Environmental Policy
Transport Canada

Jenna Craig
Sustainable Transportation and
Adaptation Team
Transport Canada

Janice Festa
Manager, Northern Transportation
Adaptation Initiative
Innovation Policy Team
Transport Canada

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 34

Appendix D: Bibliography
Adesiyn, A; S. Phillips; L. Phillips; B. Verhaeghe; and B. Wlaschin. March 2011. Final Report of ERA-NET
ROAD Programme “Road Owners Getting to Grips with Climate Change. ERA-NET. Available at
www.eranetroad.org/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_download&gid=278&Itemid=5
3
Australia Government. 2013. Climate Change Risks to Coastal Buildings and Infrastructure. A Supplement
to the First Pass National Assessment. Available at
www.climatechange.gov.au/sites/climatechange/files/documents/03_2013/risks-coastalbuildings.pdf
Australia Government. 2009. Department of Climate Change. Climate Change Risks to Australia’s Coast:
A First Pass National Assessment. Available at
www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/climate/coastal-hazards-climate-change-guidancemanual/coastal-hazards-climate-change-guidance-manual.pdf
Barfod, E, et al. 2013. “The Expert tool XGEO and its applications in the Norwegian Avalanche
Forecasting Service”. International Snow Science Workshop Grenoble – Chamonix Mont-Blanc.
Conference of European Directors of Roads. 2015. ROADAPT Guidelines. Available at
www.cedr.fr/home/index.php?id=wwwcedreuresearchcall2012&dlpath=CEDR%20Call%202012%
20Climate%20Change%2FROADAPT&cHash=93605ec7f8059c198d817901559ee5c5
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). 2007. Infrastructure and Climate
Change Risk Assessment. Report to the Victorian Government.
Danish Road Directorate. October 2013. Strategy for Adapting to Climate Change. Available at
http://en.klimatilpasning.dk/media/808853/klimatilpasningsstrategi_eng_web.pdf
Danish Road Institute. 2010. The Blue Spot Method: Development of a Screening Method to Assess Flood
Risk on Highways. Report 183-2010.
Denmark Government. 2012. How to manage cloudburst and rain water. Action Plan for a climate-proof
Denmark. Available at http://en.klimatilpasning.dk/media/590075/action_plan.pdf
Department for Transport. July 2014. Transport Resilience Review: A review of the resilience of the
transport network to extreme weather events. Available at:
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/335115/transportresilience-review-web.pdf
Department for Transport. November 2013. H2S Phase One Environmental Statement Volume 5:
Technical Appendices. Resilience to impacts from climate conditions (CL-003-000). Available at
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/259614/Volume5_Cli
mate_Change_Resilience_Report_CL-003_000.pdf
Department for Transport. July 2014. Transport Resilience Review: A review of the resilience of the
transport network to extreme weather events. Available at
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/335115/transportresilience-review-web.pdf
International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 35

Department for Transport. December 2013. Draft National Policy Statement for National Networks.
Available at
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/263720/consultationdocument-draft-national-policy-statement.pdf
Engineers Canada. February 2013. Infrastructure Climate Risk Assessment Backgrounder. Available at
http://www.pievc.ca/e/PIEVC_Backgrounder_February_2013.pdf
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. Infrastructure Slopes – Sustainable Management
And Resilience Assessment (iSMART). www.ismartproject.org/home.html
Gardiner, L. et al. 2008. Climate change effects on the land transport network volume one: literature
review and gap analysis. NZ Transport Agency Research Report 378. New Zealand Transport
Authority. Available at www.nzta.govt.nz/resources/research/reports/378/docs/378-v1.pdf
Gardiner, L. et al. 2009. Climate change effects on the land transport network volume two:
approach to risk management. NZ Transport Agency Research Report 378. New Zealand
Transport Authority. Available at www.nzta.govt.nz/resources/research/reports/378/docs/378v2.pdf
Government of Canada. 2014. Canada’s Sixth National Report on Climate Change. Available at
http://www.ec.gc.ca/cc/0BA54AAB-6E8E-4D48-B42C-DCBB09B27D10/6458_EC_ID1180MainBook_high_min%20FINAL-s.pdf
Greig, D.; J. James.; and P. Hunter. Adaptive Infrastructure Management for Coastal Highways: both a
physical and a planning exercise.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2014. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Volume II: Regional Aspects: Asia. Available at http://ipccwg2.gov/AR5/images/uploads/WGIIAR5-Chap24_FGDall.pdf
Netherlands Government. 2014. Delta Program 2015. Working on the delta: The decisions to keep the
Netherlands safe and livable. Available at
http://www.deltacommissaris.nl/english/Images/Delta%20Programme%202015%20English_tcm
310-358177.pdf
New Zealand Government. 2011. National Infrastructure Plan 2011. Available at
www.infrastructure.govt.nz/plan/2011/nip-jul11.pdf
New Zealand Government. 2010. National Infrastructure Plan 2010. Available at
www.infrastructure.govt.nz/plan/mar2010/nip-mar10.pdf
New Zealand Ministry for the Environment. July 2008. Coastal Hazards and Climate Change: A Guidance
Manual for Local Government in New Zealand. 2nd Edition. Available at
www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/climate/coastal-hazards-climate-change-guidancemanual/coastal-hazards-climate-change-guidance-manual.pdf

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 36

New Zealand Transport Agency. 2014. Transport Solutions for a Thriving New Zealand. Available at
www.nzta.govt.nz/resources/statement-of-intent/docs/SOI-2014-18-Transport-Solutions.pdf
New Zealand Transport Agency. Bridge Manual (SP/M/022). Third Edition. Available at
www.nzta.govt.nz/resources/bridge-manual/bridge-manual.html.
New Zealand Transport Agency. October 2011. State Highway Asset Management Plan 2012-2015.
Available at http://nzta.govt.nz/resources/state-highway-asset-management-plan/docs/statehighway-asset-mgmt-plan-2012-2015.pdf.
New Zealand Transport Agency. June 2008. State Highway Environment Plan: Improving environmental
sustainability and public health in New Zealand. Available at
www.nzta.govt.nz/resources/environmental-plan/docs/environmental-plan.pdf
Norwegian Ministry of the Environment. 2010. Adapting to a changing climate. Available at
www.regjeringen.no/pages/36782608/PDFS/NOU201020100010000EN_PDFS.pdf.
Rijkswaterstatt. 2012. Flood Risk and Water Management in the Netherlands: A 2012 Update.
Sinclair Knight Merz. May 2012. Coastal climate change vulnerability and adaptation. Great Ocean Road
Coast Committee. Available at
www.gorcc.com.au/file/file/media/2012/SKM%20VW05093%20Project%20Report%20final%20lo
w%20res.pdf.
United Kingdom Department for Transport. July 2014. A review of the resilience of the transport network
to extreme weather events. Available at
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/335115/transportresilience-review-web.pdf
United Kingdom Highways Agency. November 2009. Climate Change Adaptation Strategy and
Framework. Available at http://assets.highways.gov.uk/about-us/climatechange/CCAF_Strategy_and_Vol_1_Rev_B_Nov.pdf
United Kingdom Highways Agency. Design Manual for Roads and Bridges. Volume 4, Section 3, Part 3
(HD33/06): Surface and Sub-Surface Drainage Systems for Highways. Available at
www.dft.gov.uk/ha/standards/dmrb/vol4/section2/hd3306.pdf
United Kingdom Parliament. Planning Act 208. Available at
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/29/pdfs/ukpga_20080029_en.pdf
University of Melbourne.2010a. Australian Climate Change Litigation: Taip v East Gippsland Shire
Council. Available at www.law.unimelb.edu.au/creel/research/climate-change&caseID=447.
University of Melbourne.2010b. Australian Climate Change Litigation: Suburban Blue Print Pty Ltd v
Hobsons Bay City Council. Available at www.law.unimelb.edu.au/creel/research/climatechange&caseID=475.

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 37

Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal. 2014. Planning and Environment. Available at
www.vcat.vic.gov.au/disputes/planning-and-environment.
Victorian Government Department of Sustainability and Environment. June 2008. Climate Change in
Victoria: 2008 Summary. Available at
www.climatechange.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/73172/DSEstatesummaryWEB.pdf
VicRoads. September 2010. Sustainability and Climate Change Strategy: 2010-2015. Available at
www.vicroads.vic.gov.au/~/media/files/documents/planning%20and%20projects/sustainabilitya
ndclimatechangestrategy20102015.ashx

International Practices on Climate Adaptation in Transportation | 38

U.S. Department of Transportation
John A. Volpe National Transportation Systems Center
55 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02142-1093
(617) 494-2000
www.volpe.dot.gov

