FHWA-HEP-16-079

2013-2015 CLIMATE RESILIENCE PILOT
PROGRAM: OUTCOMES, LESSONS LEARNED, AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
JULY 2016

Forward
State and regional transportation agencies across the country are facing an increase in extreme
weather events that damage roads, bridges and other transportation facilities. Heat waves,
drought, storm surges and heavy downpours are becoming more frequent and severe. Sea level
rise that is already affecting coastal assets and communities today will accelerate in the future.
These climate change and extreme weather events pose significant risks to the safety,
reliability, effectiveness, and sustainability of the Nation’s transportation system.
Over the course of two years, FHWA worked with State Departments of transportation (DOTs)
and metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) to undertake 19 assessments of climate
change and extreme weather vulnerability and adaptation options on their transportation
systems. The pilots used and built on FHWA’s Climate Change and Extreme Weather
Vulnerability Assessment Framework. This report highlights results and lessons learned from
those efforts and will be helpful for others conducting climate change vulnerability
assessments. We will fold these lessons learned into an updated Climate Change Resilience
Framework. The audience for this report includes transportation planners, asset managers, civil
engineers, and others interested in assessing and addressing resilience of transportation
systems. More information on climate resilience can be found on the FHWA website at:
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/.
This publication does not supersede any publication; and is a Final version.

Gloria Shepherd
Associate Administrator for
Planning, Environment & Realty
Federal Highway Administration

Tom Everett
Associate Administrator for
Infrastructure
Federal Highway Administration

Notice
This document is disseminated under the sponsorship of the U.S.
Department of Transportation in the interest of information exchange.
The U.S. Government assumes no liability for the use of the
information contained in this document.
The U.S. Government does not endorse products or manufacturers.
Trademarks or manufacturers' names appear in this report only
because they are considered essential to the objective of the
document.
Quality Assurance Statement
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) provides high-quality
information to serve Government, industry, and the public in a manner
that promotes public understanding. Standards and policies are used to
ensure and maximize the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of its
information. FHWA periodically reviews quality issues and adjusts its
programs and processes to ensure continuous quality improvement.

Technical Report Documentation Page
Form Approved OMB No. 0704-0188
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the
time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and
completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other
aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters
Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA
22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC
20503.
1. AGENCY USE ONLY
2. REPORT DATE
3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES
July 2016
Final Report
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE
2013-2015 Climate Resilience Pilot Program: Outcomes, Lessons Learned,
and Recommendations
6. AUTHOR(S)
ICF International
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
ICF International
1725 Eye Street NW, Suite 1000
Washington, DC 20006
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
Federal Highway Administration
1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE
Washington, DC 20590

5. PROJECT ID NUMBER

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER

FHWA-HEP-16-079

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Available From:

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)
The Federal Highway Administration’s (FHWA)’s Climate Resilience Pilot Program sought to assist state Departments of
Transportation (DOTs), Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs), and Federal Land Management Agencies (FLMAs)
in enhancing resilience of transportation systems to extreme weather and climate change. From 2013 to 2015,
nineteen pilot teams partnered with FHWA to assess transportation vulnerability and evaluate options for improving
resilience. This report synthesizes lessons learned, needs identified, and recommended next steps from the pilot
program. Illustrative project findings, outcomes, and examples are distributed throughout the report.
14. SUBJECT TERMS
15. NUMBER OF PAGES 58
climate change, vulnerability assessments, adaptation, transportation
16. ACCOUNTING DATA
resilience

17. SECURITY
CLASSIFICATION OF
REPORT
Unclassified

18. SECURITY
CLASSIFICATION OF THIS
PAGE
Unclassified

19. SECURITY
CLASSIFICATION OF
ABSTRACT
Unclassified

20. LIMITATION OF
ABSTRACT

Contents
Forward ............................................................................................................................................ i
Executive Summary......................................................................................................................... 1
1

Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 4

2

Overview of 2013-2015 Climate Resilience Pilots ................................................................... 5

3

Lessons Learned from 2013-2015 Pilot Efforts ..................................................................... 13
3.1

3.1.1

Defining Scope ........................................................................................................ 14

3.1.2

Assessing Vulnerability ........................................................................................... 16

3.1.3

Integrating into Decision Making ............................................................................ 31

3.2
4

5

Successful Approaches ................................................................................................... 13

Challenges Encountered................................................................................................. 42

Needs ..................................................................................................................................... 44
4.1

Information Needs ......................................................................................................... 44

4.2

Other Resource Needs ................................................................................................... 45

Pilot Recommendations for FHWA ........................................................................................ 46

Appendix A – Resources................................................................................................................ 50

Executive Summary

Introduction to the Program
The Federal Highway Administration’s (FHWA)’s Climate Resilience Pilot Program sought to
assist state Departments of Transportation (DOTs), Metropolitan Planning Organizations
(MPOs), and Federal Land Management Agencies (FLMAs) in enhancing resilience of
transportation systems to extreme weather and climate change. From 2013 to 2015, nineteen
pilot teams partnered with FHWA to assess transportation vulnerability and evaluate options
for improving resilience.
Key Program Outcomes
The pilot program helped build a community of practice for transportation agencies seeking to
increase resilience to weather extremes. The pilots participated in peer exchanges and,
collectively, have developed a wealth of best practices and examples for every stage of the
adaptation process, including: collecting and applying climate change projections; identifying
critical assets; assessing vulnerabilities and risks; calculating costs and benefits of adaptation;
and incorporating risks into decision-making.
The pilot teams are now more prepared to address climate change and extreme weather risks.
They have built capacity among staff to understand the challenge of climate change. Pilots
have developed replicable processes to expand vulnerability or cost-benefit analyses, where
applicable. Pilot teams are also integrating their findings into decision making by incorporating
climate change into engineering design, long range planning, and asset management.
This report synthesizes lessons learned, needs identified, and recommended next steps from
the pilot program. Illustrative project findings, outcomes, and examples are distributed
throughout the report.

1

Lessons Learned: Successful Approaches and
Challenges Encountered

A Sampling of Program
Outcomes

Each of the 2013-2015 pilot projects took unique
approaches to conducting vulnerability
assessments and evaluating adaptation options.
The methods and findings reflect locally-specific
transportation priorities and climate conditions.
This report synthesizes successful approaches
across the pilots and provides illustrative examples
in alignment with the key elements of the FHWA
Climate Change and Extreme Weather
Vulnerability Assessment Framework.

California DOT
District 1

is providing
information from their
analysis to help a
local transportation
planning agency
assess routing
options over a river

Capital
Area MPO &
Hillsborough
MPO

incorporated
vulnerability
assessment results
into their 2040 Long
Range Transportation
Plans

Connecticut
DOT

plans to update their
Drainage Manual as a
result of this project
is adding data

For example, in defining the scope of the studies,
generated during the
pilot project into their
pilots found it helpful at project outset to
BridgeWatch program
(a real-time bridge
strategically determine the appropriate project
monitoring and alert
Iowa DOT
system) to help
scale and to leverage existing studies and the
decision-makers take
expertise of stakeholders and partners. Successful
a proactive approach
to public safety
vulnerability assessment approaches included:
during potential
overtopping events
working closely with maintenance and other staff
is using the results of
to collect and utilize institutional knowledge;
this study to delineate
Maryland State
a “Climate Change
leveraging existing data and vulnerability
Impact Zone” to help
Highway
screen new project
assessment tools; using qualitative screening
Administration
plans and designs for
approaches; using maps or other visualization
future climate impacts
tools; and using indicators of vulnerability. The
developed highresolution flooding
teams also developed several approaches for
projections for use in
Massachusetts
future project design
vulnerability assessment data processing and
DOT
by them and other
organizations in the
analysis. For example, seven pilots tested
Boston area
approaches to use climate model projections in
hydrologic analyses. Finally, pilot teams tested ways to integrate understanding of risks into
decision-making. Several pilot teams identified and evaluated adaptation options, testing
approaches that: utilized existing adaptation tools, processes, and datasets; used adaptation
evaluation criteria that reflect priorities of local stakeholders; analyzed costs and benefits; and
engaged stakeholders to vet adaptation options.
In testing these approaches, the pilots faced and overcame several challenges related to
defining the scope of their projects, data collection and processing, coordination with partners
and stakeholders, and obtaining verification of assessment results.
2

Needs
The pilots have made significant advances in the “state of the practice” of adapting
transportation systems to climate change. In the process, they identified several needs for
additional information and resources. For example, pilot teams identified the need for more
information, guidance, and tools to support climate analysis, benefit cost assessments, and
integration of vulnerability assessment results and adaptation into transportation planning.
The pilots have already begun to address some of these needs. For example, NYSDOT
developed a benefits valuation approach to help decision makers prioritize infrastructure and
assess when to undertake culvert replacements considering social, economic, and
environmental factors.
Pilot Recommendations for FHWA
The pilots provided recommendations for how FHWA can continue to support state and local
transportation agencies as they attempt to increase their resilience to extreme weather events
and climate change. Recommendations included:







Further refine the Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment
Framework to reflect lessons learned from pilot projects (e.g., expanding the Integrate
into Decision-Making section, updating and expanding guidance on appropriate use of
climate projections, and expanding information on operations and maintenance
adaptation);
Provide resources to help agencies evaluate the costs and benefits of adaptation
strategies;
Provide centralized access to the tools and resources developed during the pilot
projects;
Facilitate coordination with other federal agencies; and
Help secure additional funding for analysis and implementation of adaptation strategies.

3

1 Introduction
The Federal Highway Administration’s (FHWA)’s Climate Resilience Pilot Program seeks to assist
state Departments of Transportation (DOTs), Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs), and
Federal Land Management Agencies (FLMAs) in enhancing resilience of transportation systems
to extreme weather and climate change. In 2010-2011, five pilot teams from across the country
participated in the program to advance the practice of climate change and extreme weather
vulnerability assessments for transportation. In 2013-2015, nineteen pilot teams (see Figure 1)
partnered with FHWA to assess transportation vulnerability and evaluate options for improving
resilience, including:














Arizona DOT (ADOT)
California DOT (Caltrans), District 1
Capital Area MPO (CAMPO)
Connecticut DOT (CT DOT)
Hillsborough MPO
Iowa DOT
Maine DOT
Maryland State Highway
Administration (MDSHA)
Massachusetts DOT (MassDOT)
Michigan DOT (MDOT)
Minnesota DOT (MnDOT)









Metropolitan Transportation
Commission (MTC)
North Central Texas Council of
Governments (NCTCOG)
New York State DOT (NYSDOT)
Oregon DOT (ODOT)
South Florida
Tennessee DOT (TDOT)
Washington State DOT (WSDOT)
Western Federal Lands Highway
Division (WFLHD) and the Alaska
DOT and Public Facilities (ADOT&PF)

Figure 1. 2010-2011 and 2013-2015 pilot study areas

4

FHWA’s Climate Change & Extreme Weather
Vulnerability Assessment Framework was an
important element of the program. The 20102011 pilot teams tested a conceptual model that
guided transportation agencies through the
process of collecting and integrating climate and
asset data in order to identify critical
vulnerabilities. FHWA used the feedback and
lessons learned from the first round of pilots to
revise the draft conceptual model into the
framework. The 2013-2015 pilot teams utilized
the framework and continued to identify lessons
learned regarding vulnerability assessments and
evaluation of adaptation options.

19
100+

2013-2015 FHWA
Climate Resilience
Pilots
Project partner
and stakeholders
entities engaged

7+

Pilots using U.S.
DOT climate
change tools*

2,200+

Assets assessed
for vulnerability

200+

Adaptation
options identified

The 2013-2015 pilot teams engaged with their
21 Webinars
transportation peers, stakeholders, and decisionmakers to carry out projects, make
4 Peer exchanges
recommendations, and share lessons learned.
The pilot teams formed a community of practice
* U.S. DOT tools include Transportation Climate
by participating in a series of webinars and peer
Change Sensitivity Matrix; CMIP Climate Data
Processing Tool; Vulnerability Assessment
exchanges and sharing resources and information
Scoring Tool (VAST); 11-Step General Process
for Transportation Facility Adaptation
online. Pilot teams built coalitions at the local
Assessments
level to guide their projects. Most of the pilots
convened an advisory group or coordinated with other government entities or the public and
plan to continue these partnerships after the program. The findings from the vulnerability
assessment and adaptation evaluation projects also influenced decisions. For example,
MassDOT is changing their plans for development of a maintenance facility in a vulnerable
location, Hillsborough MPO and CAMPO have incorporated their findings into their most recent
Long Range Transportation Plans (LRTPs), WSDOT incorporated climate change analysis into
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) requirements, and the governor of Massachusetts
requested that MassDOT expand their modeling analysis to cover the entire state. The pilot
teams and program disseminated lessons learned via webinars, speaking engagements, printed
case studies, and online resources.

2 Overview of 2013-2015 Climate Resilience Pilots
Each of the 2013-2015 pilot projects took unique approaches to conducting vulnerability
assessments and/or evaluating adaptation options. The methods and findings reflect locally5

specific transportation priorities and climate conditions. Table 1 provides a very brief
description of each pilot project and highlights a few illustrative project findings and outcomes.
Case studies of each of the pilot projects are available at:
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/resilience_pilots/20132015_pilots/index.cfm.

6

Pilot
Arizona DOT
(ADOT)

California DOT
(Caltrans),
District 1

Capital Area
MPO (CAMPO)

Table 1. Overview of 2013-2015 Climate Resilience Pilots
Project Description
Illustrative Project Findings and Key Outcomes
The ADOT team conducted a study to identify hotspots Because the study scope covered a 300-mile stretch of
where highways are vulnerable to associated hazards
highway, it helped screen for areas that require a closer
from high temperatures, drought, and intense storms. analysis of specific assets’ vulnerabilities. The study found
The project focused on the Interstate corridor
that while temperature increases may reduce winter
connecting Nogales, Tucson, Phoenix, and Flagstaff,
maintenance and operations costs, extreme heat may also
which includes a variety of urban areas, landscapes,
require a reevaluation of design standards for heat-resistant
biotic communities, and climate zones and presents a pavement and affect protocols for construction windows
range of weather conditions applicable to much of
and worker safety. The assessment also found that future
Arizona.
precipitation and wildfire trends are uncertain, though
increases in the magnitude of events could pose a threat to
ADOT assets.
The vulnerability assessment approach drew from
Climate change will predominately impact District 1 roads
methodologies developed by FHWA and the
through sea level rise and increased
Washington State DOT 2010-2011 climate resilience
coastal erosion hazards. Inland, the district is also
pilot project. The pilot assessed vulnerability in four
vulnerable to significant historical slope instability, drainage,
counties by scoring asset criticality and potential
and erosion. The vulnerability assessment is informing
impact. The pilot identified adaptation options at four studies on Highway 101 and the adaptation analysis is
prototype locations of vulnerable road segments. The providing information to assist a local transportation
Caltrans District 1 team formalized their adaptation
planning agency in its assessment of routing options over a
methodology into a tool to assist with the evaluation
river.
and prioritization of adaptation options.
The CAMPO team used a data and stakeholder-driven The project team conducted research and interviews to
approach to assess risks to nine critical assets from
identify “sensitivity thresholds” for each stressor—that is,
flooding, drought, extreme heat, wildfire, and ice. The the levels of rain or temperature at which the region’s
project team conducted a criticality workshop,
transportation infrastructure experiences disruptions or
developed local climate projections, and performed
damage. These thresholds helped identify what climate data
risk assessments for each asset.
to develop and how to apply the climate data in a
vulnerability assessment. CAMPO also used a regional
climate model (RCM) rather than downscaled global climate
7

Connecticut
DOT (CT DOT)

The CTDOT team conducted a systems-level
vulnerability assessment of bridge and culvert
structures from inland flooding associated with
extreme rainfall events. The assessment included data
collection and field review, hydrologic and hydraulic
evaluation, criticality assessment and hydraulic design
criteria evaluation.

Hillsborough
MPO

The Hillsborough MPO team assessed the vulnerability
of select surface transportation assets to sea level rise,
storm surge, and flooding in order to identify costeffective risk management strategies for incorporation
into short-term and long-range transportation
planning.

Iowa DOT

To evaluate future flood conditions, the Iowa DOT
team developed a methodology to integrate climate
projections of rainfall within a river system model to
predict river flood response to climate change. Iowa
DOT tested this methodology in two river basins to
evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of technology
to produce scenarios of future flood conditions. They
8

models. CAMPO incorporated the results of the study into
their latest LRTP. At the conclusion of the study, CAMPO
and the City of Austin hosted an inaugural Extreme Weather
Resiliency Symposium with agencies from around the
region, and intend to form a multi-agency working group to
build on the momentum of this project.
The CTDOT team found that most structures were built with
excess capacity and will therefore be able to accommodate
future increases in precipitation. Moving forward, CTDOT
recommended that all new infrastructure be designed using
the precipitation data from the NRCC-NRCS “Precip.net”
until the new NOAA Atlas 14 data were available. Before
this study, CTDOT was still using TP-40 for their designs
which hadn’t been updated since 1961.
Hillsborough MPO devoted a chapter within its Long Range
Transportation Plan (LRTP) to discuss the results of this
analysis. One of the assets identified as critical in the study
was scheduled for reconstruction in the MPO’s LRTP and the
MPO found that adaptation measures could be
incorporated cost-effectively during reconstruction. For
example, a $4.2 million investment to mitigate flood risk for
Memorial Highway would result in a net benefit of $2.1-$8.4
million if it experienced a Category 1 storm surge (and
higher benefits for a stronger storm).
Iowa DOT determined that the leading edge of downscaled
climate projection data resolution (one-eighth degree and
daily increments) was sufficient for simulating peak flow
statistics of “Big Basins and Big Floods,” quantitatively
defined as basins exceeding 100 square miles with floods
exceeding twice the mean annual peak flow. This modeling
was used to confirm that a new bridge project on I-35 will

also analyzed the potential impact of the future floods
on six bridges to evaluate vulnerability to climate
change and extreme weather and inform the
development of adaptation options.
Maine DOT
The Maine DOT team identified transportation assets
that are vulnerable to flooding from sea level rise and
storm surge in six coastal towns. The team developed
depth-damage functions and adaptation design
options at three of the sites and evaluated the costs
and benefits of the alternative design structures.
Maryland State The MDSHA team developed a three-tiered
Highway
vulnerability assessment methodology and GIS layers
Administration of statewide water surfaces to analyze vulnerability to
(MDSHA)
sea level rise, storm surge, and flooding in two
counties. The team also reviewed design strategies,
best management practices, planning standards, and
other ways to support the adoption of adaptive
management solutions.
Massachusetts The MassDOT team sought to better understand the
DOT (MassDOT) vulnerability of the I-93 Central Artery/Tunnel system
(CA/T) in Boston to sea level rise and extreme storm
events. The team combined a state-of-the-art
hydrodynamic flood model with agency-driven
knowledge and priorities to assess vulnerabilities and
develop adaptation strategies.

Michigan DOT
(MDOT)

The MDOT team conducted a climate-based
vulnerability assessment of mostly MDOT-owned and operated transportation infrastructure, including
9

be resilient under future flood scenarios.

The analysis found that the majority of damage would be
from storm surge, not sea level rise. At each site, they
identified the design option with the lowest total life cycle
cost under each sea level rise scenario. In general, smaller
structures that required lower or moderate initial
construction costs tended to be more cost-efficient.
The sea level rise mapping results have been integrated into
the project screening process. Additionally, MDSHA is using
the results in their regional planning processes, such as
when the Office of Structures staff are doing a bridge
replacement, they will see the vulnerability assessment
results. SHA will evaluate the vulnerability of drainage
structures statewide using the approach developed in the
pilot.
The project team used the model to develop a series of
projected water surface elevations for hurricanes and
nor’easters. Using a Monte Carlo approach, the team was
able to estimate the probability of flooding on a highresolution grid under current and two future sea level rise
scenarios, and to assess flood entry points and pathways
(and thereby identify potential locations for regional
adaptation strategies). In many cases, large upland areas are
flooded by a relatively small and distinct entry point (e.g., a
low elevation area along the coastline).
The assessment found that the most at-risk transportation
assets were situated in the southern third of the state,
where the state’s larger urban areas are located. Increased

roads, bridges, pumps and culverts. The assessment
used GIS to overlay climate projections onto asset
information from MDOT’s existing asset management
database to help identify locations and infrastructure
that may be at risk.
Minnesota DOT
(MnDOT)

Metropolitan
Transportation
Commission
(MTC)

North Central
Texas Council
of
Governments

The MnDOT team conducted a vulnerability
assessment of bridges, culverts, pipes, and roads
paralleling streams to flooding in two districts. Based
on the vulnerability assessment results, they
developed facility-level adaptation options for two
selected culverts programmed for replacement. Using
damage and economic loss estimates associated with
flash flooding as well as cost estimates for alternative
engineering designs the team identified the most cost
effective options under a range of climate scenarios.
The MTC team refined a previous vulnerability
assessment with additional sea level rise mapping and
hydraulic analysis. Using the revised vulnerability data,
the project team developed a comprehensive suite of
adaptation strategies for three focus areas, and
through a systematic evaluation process, they selected
five adaptation strategies for further development:
living levees (in two locations), an offshore
breakwater, a drainage study, and mainstreaming
climate change risk into transportation agencies
planning processes.
The NCTCOG team assessed the vulnerability of
existing and planned transportation infrastructure in
the Dallas-Fort Worth region, where extreme weather
events will add an additional stress on the
10

winter temperatures and precipitation could result in
decreased snowfall and increased rain, posing potential
operations and maintenance challenges. The analysis also
revealed that additional data on elevation, flood plains, and
land use would be helpful to provide a more robust
assessment of asset vulnerability.
MnDOT plans to incorporate the identified risks into culvert
and bridge improvement programs, asset management
databases, the asset management plan, and MnDOT’s risk
registers. This information may feed into the development
of emergency action plans, real-time monitoring and
warning systems for vulnerable assets, and the prioritization
of funding for cost-effective adaptation strategies.

The policy/research and physical adaptation strategies
developed as part of this pilot all include information on the
process and partners needed for implementation,
preliminary scopes/conceptual designs (including cost
estimates), potential barriers, and a summary of impacts of
implementation. This information is helping to inform
regional and state policy and investment decisions, and the
overall process is serving as a framework for similar projects
in the region.

The vulnerability assessment found that 636 miles of roads
in the region have the potential to be inundated by a 100year flood. The pilot project also found that the increase in
temperature compounded by a projected decrease in

(NCTCOG)

New York State
DOT (NYSDOT)

Oregon DOT
(ODOT)

South Florida

transportation system in the rapidly growing region.

annual rainfall in the region may reduce soil moisture, which
could cause pavement cracking and stresses on bridges and
culverts.
The NYSDOT team assessed the vulnerability of the
The approach considers qualitative and quantitative factors
transportation system to changes in precipitation in
and provides a menu of potential benefits that users can
the rural Lake Champlain Basin. The team developed a tailor to different geographies and data availability. Overall,
benefits valuation approach to help decision makers
the results of the pilot project illuminated that a strong
prioritize infrastructure and assess when to undertake asset management strategy will focus funds on the right
culvert replacements considering social, economic,
treatment at the right time in the right place. The strategy
and environmental factors. They evaluated
considers the condition of the assets, the location and the
vulnerability, criticality and risk, and developed a
project’s context in the transportation system and local
method to apply an environmental benefits multiplier geography, risk to the assets, and the function of the
to each culvert.
roadway.
The ODOT team engaged maintenance and technical
Nearly all the designated “Lifeline Routes” in the study area,
staff and utilized asset data to assess the vulnerability which are essential for emergency response and economic
of highway infrastructure in two coastal counties to
connectivity, were found to be vulnerable to projected
extreme weather events and higher sea levels. Based
climate impacts. ODOT developed a list of adaptation
on the results of the vulnerability assessment, the pilot options for highly vulnerable sites. However, they found
conducted further analysis of specific adaptation sites, that implementing adaptation strategies would not be costoptions, and benefits and costs for five priority storm
effective at the two sites they performed cost-benefit
and landslide hazard areas. Options analyzed ranged
analyses for, due to availability of detour routes and low
from “do nothing” scenarios to options for increased
traffic volumes, and other factors. This suggests adaptation
operations and maintenance and options with
may be more appropriate at a corridor-level in Oregon.
significant construction and engineering requirements. ODOT also identified many parallels between adaptation
planning work and seismic resilience planning work, and is
looking for ways to enhance that collaboration.
The South Florida team focused on a four-county
A key outcome of this study was a consolidated and qualityregion in conducting a detailed geospatial analysis to
controlled geospatial dataset of the region’s transportation
calculate vulnerability scores for “regionally
infrastructure, elevation, and floodplains. The team learned
significant” road and passenger rail infrastructure. The that data availability and quality were critical to the datastudy also recommended ways for partner agencies to driven analysis and identified several strategies to facilitate
11

incorporate the vulnerability results into their normal
decision-making processes.
Tennessee DOT
(TDOT)

Washington
State DOT
(WSDOT)

Western
Federal Lands
Highway
Division
(WFLHD) and
the Alaska DOT
and Public
Facilities
(ADOT&PF)

The TDOT team conducted an extreme weather
vulnerability assessment of transportation
infrastructure across the state. The project team
compiled a statewide inventory of the most critical
transportation infrastructure and used historical and
projected climate and weather data as well as
stakeholder feedback to develop rankings of the
vulnerability of critical transportation assets to
projected temperature and precipitation changes and
other extreme weather events.
The WSDOT team examined adaptation options in the
Skagit River Basin, an area of the state identified in an
earlier assessment as highly vulnerable to flooding.
Adaptation options centered on 11 vulnerable road
segments in the study area. Options included active
traffic management, detour routes, basin-wide flood
easements, and culvert improvements.
The WFLHD/ADOT&PF team assessed three unique
climate change issues in the state of Alaska. In
Kivalina, the pilot considered the impact of the loss of
sea ice, sea level rise, and wind on shoreline erosion of
the coastal runway. In Igloo Creek and along the
Dalton Highway, the pilot considered the impacts of
increased temperature (resulting in permafrost melt)
and increased precipitation on landslides and
pavement cracking.

12

data collection and aggregation in future efforts, including
encouraging the collection of relevant data a part of normal
activities.
The team found that climate impacts vary greatly across the
state, with different events creating high levels of
vulnerability in west, middle, and east Tennessee. TDOT
intends to select 15-20 of the most vulnerable assets
identified by the study for a more detailed analysis and
initiate a dialogue on how to incorporate results from the
study into TDOT and MPO policies and procedures across
Tennessee. TDOT also plans to use the vulnerability
assessment in developing a risk-based transportation asset
management plan.
The WSDOT team explored using a then-in-process U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers flood study of the Skagit River
Basin to understand vulnerabilities, identify adaptation
strategies, and foster interagency collaboration. The team
found that this model-based analysis validated and
complemented their earlier workshop and interview-based
analysis and that it is critical to communicate proposed
actions between agencies.
In addition to looking at primary variables such as
temperature and precipitation, the WFLHD/ADOT&PF team
considered it important to also consider secondary and
tertiary variables, such as permafrost thaw and landslides,
respectively.

3 Lessons Learned from 2013-2015 Pilot Efforts
3.1 Successful Approaches
The 2013-2015 pilot teams drew from the successful approaches from the 2010-2011 projects
that helped inform the Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment
Framework (illustrated in Figure 2).1 Illustrative examples of lessons learned from the 20132015 pilot projects are presented below in alignment with the key elements of the framework.
The section outlining successful approaches within Step 3 includes two main components: (1)
identify, analyze, and prioritize adaptation options and (2) incorporate results into
transportation
programs
and processes.

Figure 2. Diagram of FHWA’s Climate Change and Extreme
Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
1

FHWA, Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework, Washington, DC, 2012,
available at
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/publications_and_tools/vulnerability_assess
ment_framework/page00.cfm.

13

3.1.1 Defining Scope
Framing the scope of a study is an important first component in order to determine the level of
detail required in the analysis and form bounds to the study, minimizing data collection and
analysis activities that would ultimately be extraneous to study objectives. Elements to consider
when defining the scope of a study include geography, decision timeframe, and coverage of
assets and climate stressors.
Pilots considered project budget and timeline, data availability, and near-term priorities when
determining the project scale. A few pilots limited their study areas to a few locations to pilot
an approach that they intend to replicate.






MnDOT piloted their vulnerability assessment approach in two districts that have
experienced particularly severe flooding in recent years. Piloting their approach helped
ground-truth the vulnerabilities and develop and refine a replicable approach. The pilot
team also framed the project to identify cost-effective resilient planning and design
solutions for specific facilities where replacement is already planned, which will help
integrate the results into decision-making for near-term priorities.
ADOT sought to maximize analysis within the project budget and timeline by focusing
on a highway corridor that includes a variety of urban areas, landscapes, biotic
communities and climate zones, which represent a range of weather conditions
applicable to much of Arizona.
WFLHD/ADOT&PF used a representative case study approach to assess climate
vulnerabilities and identify adaptation options; the size and range of climate impacts in
the State of Alaska precluded undertaking a statewide assessment within the available
time and budget.

Several pilot teams leveraged existing studies to stretch available project funds to encompass a
more expansive scope. The teams coordinated with other agencies at the project outset to
identify the relevant existing studies and continued to engage the project team from those
studies throughout the project.




WSDOT built off of the statewide climate change vulnerability assessment conducted in
the 2010-2011 pilot study and focused on examining adaptation options in a highly
vulnerable area of the state, the Skagit River Basin. The pilot framed the scope of the
study to take advantage of data from a major flood risk reduction study by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers in the basin.
Maine DOT’s pilot project dovetailed with a National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA)-funded Project of Special Merit (POSM) that studied the effect
of sea level rise on marsh migration in six coastal towns. The pilot team defined the
scope of the vulnerability assessment to transportation assets in the same study area in
14



order to leverage the findings and products from the previous study, including marsh
and sea migration maps.
NYSDOT and its partner, The Nature Conservancy (TNC), had previously carried out
several projects that were useful for this pilot effort, including: a climate assessment for
the Lake Champlain Basin, the development of a culvert prioritization model, and culvert
inventory in the Ausable River watershed. The past projects helped define the scope of
analysis to inform prioritization of stream crossings for upgrades that would improve
both climate resilience and fish passage.

Pilot teams also leveraged the expertise of stakeholders, partner agencies, academic
institutions, and other local partners. These project stakeholders and partners helped identify
relevant existing data and resources, which helped pilot teams frame the study scope. Some
partners also provided analytical assistance throughout the project.







MnDOT and Iowa DOT hydraulic engineers were central to their vulnerability
assessment and adaptation planning processes.
Iowa DOT partnered with Iowa State University for projected continuous daily rainfall,
and with the University of Iowa Flood Center for hydrologic modeling that supported
the vulnerability assessment.
NYSDOT partnered with the United States Geological Survey (USGS) to develop an
enhanced StreamStats tool that incorporates future climate projections into streamflow
statistics.
Most pilots set up advisory groups to engage stakeholders and vet data and
approaches. For example, the role of the Caltrans technical advisory group was to
review project progress, contribute to vulnerability and adaptation rankings, and
contribute ideas and knowledge to the overall process.

Finally, pilots considered a broad range of stressors in their analyses, including non-climate
stressors, within available resources. Vulnerabilities are often interrelated and non-climate
stressors (e.g., economic development) can also have larger repercussions on the
transportation system than climate change.


NCTCOG evaluated extreme events such as snow, ice storms, and thunderstorms that
have disrupted transportation in the past in addition to climate stressors that North
Central Texas more typically experiences such as extreme heat, heavy rainfall and
flooding, and drought. The pilot team also analyzed the urban heat island effect as
another heat stressor.

15

3.1.2 Assessing Vulnerability
The Climate Resilience Pilot projects demonstrated multiple ways to assess climate-related
transportation system vulnerabilities. Possible approaches range from qualitative to
quantitative, from data-driven to stakeholder-driven, and from regional to asset-specific. The
“right” approach is the one that fits within available resources (e.g., time, data, engagement)
and, more importantly, provides the necessary information to help the agency make more
climate-informed decisions in the future.
Despite the variety of approaches, several common themes emerged from the 19 pilot projects.
Chief among them was how pilots collected and utilized institutional knowledge, working
closely with maintenance and other staff as part of the vulnerability assessment process. For
example:








Caltrans District 1 worked with
maintenance staff to create maps of
historical events, including miles per
event, cost per mile, and total cost. The
exercise drew from a maintenance
information database as well as
interviews with maintenance staff.
MnDOT consulted maintenance staff
and engineers in developing and
evaluating indicators. For example, for
the “previous flood issues” indicator,
MnDOT held a working session with
Figure 3. WSDOT pilot team workshop with
district staff to identify assets that had
Skagit County (Source: WSDOT)
flooded in the past 20 years.
Additionally, the project team worked with MnDOT structural and water resources
engineers to weight each indicator so that indicators perceived as more important to
characterizing vulnerability could be factored more heavily into the final scores.
CAMPO worked with state and local maintenance and engineering staff to establish at
which thresholds specific extreme weather stressors are most likely to disrupt,
deteriorate, or damage the transportation system. Thresholds included those based on
design specifications as well as empirical, or observed, thresholds at which damage had
occurred in the past.
TDOT developed and administered an online survey of more than 400 transportation
experts and stakeholders across the state to assess the potential impacts to different
types of assets when exposed to a variety of extreme weather hazards. The 220
respondents evaluated the impacts according to a four-point qualitative scale (nominal,
16





moderate, significant, and catastrophic). The results of the survey were used to create
impact scores for each asset type and weather category combination in the assessment.
MassDOT held several “Institutional Knowledge” meetings with a variety of staff
members (e.g., electrical engineers, maintenance, asset management) with detailed
knowledge about the Central Artery/Tunnel System. The meetings were used to
prioritize assets for inclusion in the vulnerability assessment, to identify existing
datasets, and to understand the interdependencies in the system.
NYSDOT compiled information about vulnerable road-stream crossings and road
segment data through development of statewide GIS layers and by local outreach. The
Nature Conservancy met with staff from Essex and Clinton County Departments of
Public Works and Town highway supervisors from Essex and Clinton County and mapped
their local vulnerable assets.

Pilots effectively engaged stakeholders using maps and other visualization tools, finding them
to be a straightforward way to convey data-heavy analyses and findings. In addition, historical
extreme weather events can serve as useful
proxies to facilitate discussions of future
vulnerabilities from climate change.




ODOT presented district maintenance
crew and technical staff with a web-based
GIS map with layers on existing conditions
with locations of known hazards and
weather-related incident response (Figure
4) and future sea levels. ODOT also
mapped maintenance records related to
flooding, high water, landslides, and
rockfalls. Using the historical and future
climate data provided and their local
knowledge, the workshop participants
identified “climate hazard sites” on the
map.
Caltrans District 1 overlaid climate change
Figure 4. ODOT Map of “existing
information on sea level rise, storm surge,
conditions” used for workshops with
temperature, and precipitation for both
maintenance staff (Source: ODOT)
mean and extreme conditions with asset
data in GIS. The maps and information from historical maintenance events helped the
team evaluate the potential for impact, defined as the level of interruption of service of
the asset.
17

Several pilots took advantage of existing datasets and vulnerability assessment tools to
complete their assessments. When necessary, the pilots modified the existing tools to meet
their specific needs and circumstances.










MDSHA used the U.S. DOT CMIP Data Processing to collect precipitation projections for
the study area. The pilot team also used the U.S. DOT Vulnerability Assessment Scoring
Tool (VAST) to arrive at a preliminary composite vulnerability score for bridges and
adjusted the scores through a workshop with MDSHA’s engineers.
CAMPO used VAST to collect and organize data on each of the nine critical assets
analyzed and to develop risk ratings for each asset. CAMPO built on the default
information in VAST by adding a few additional indicators, reviewing and refining the
default scoring mechanisms, and generating customized risk outputs.
TDOT used the U.S. DOT CMIP Climate Data Processing Tool to obtain downscaled
projected data for extreme
temperatures and precipitation in four
major Tennessee cities (Nashville,
Knoxville, Chattanooga, and Memphis).
In using the tool, TDOT selected data from
all 21 available CMIP5 climate models
for each of the tool runs in order to
obtain the most robust current
projections using the best available
science.
ADOT developed a batch processing
script to make the U.S. DOT CMIP
Climate Data Processing Tool evaluate
the entire 300-mile study corridor with
greater ease than conducting individual
runs for each segment of the corridor
(Figure 5).
ODOT used R programming language
for statistical computing of climate
data, which they found to be easier and Figure 5. ADOT-modified CMIP Climate Data
Processing Tool results from batch processing
quicker than ArcGIS. The pilot team
over large geographic areas (figure shown is
also used the U.S. DOT CMIP Climate
projected number of days above 100°F)
Data Processing Tool to gather
(Source: ADOT)
downscaled CMIP5 climate projections
within the project study corridor.
18



MDOT used its scour critical bridge inventory and analysis framework for determining
criticality. This approach was consistent with existing practices, allowing MDOT to more
readily integrate findings into other planning and investment analysis efforts.

Data collection and analysis can be one of the most challenging elements of a climate change
vulnerability assessment. Pilots learned to consider a variety of approaches to data processing
in order to find the approach best suited to their context. In addition, pilots learned that other
agencies may have the data they need, particularly hydraulic/hydrologic data, so partnerships
are important to make sure DOTs have access to the data they need and in a format that will be
compatible with other parts of the analysis. The pilots took a wide variety of approaches to
collecting and analyzing climate and asset data.
Hydrological analyses
Determining how hydrology and floodplains may change as a result of changing
precipitation patterns is one of the most challenging tasks facing transportation
agencies. Seven of the pilots focused on overcoming this challenge. Example approaches
from these pilots are provided below.


Iowa DOT incorporated rainfall simulations into a highly detailed CUENCAS
hydrologic model to determine future peak discharge flows. The model
independently calculated the percentage of daily rainfall that is absorbed into
the soil and the percentage that is runoff for each unit of landscape. Because it is
a continuous model, precipitation in the days or hours before a rainfall event is
stored in the model. This allowed the project team to see that big storms have a
larger impact when preceded by small events that increase the antecedent
moisture content. Iowa DOT found that, under the climate model projections, all
six critical interstate and highway locations would be exposed to streamflow that
exceeds current design standards. Bridge and highway resilience would need to
be improved in four of the six pilot bridge locations to withstand the projected
increases in extreme streamflow.

19

Legend:

Figure
Iowa(1960-2009)
DOT, current
and future
ranges for demarcate
quantiles quan
of peak
flow for
Shaded 6.
region
and dashed
lines (1960-2059)
le projec
onCedar
range
River
Basin
and
Southand
Skunk
River
Basin (right).
Shaded region and solid black
bounded
by (left)
median
of upper
lower
95th confidence
interval.
Soliddemark
line (black,
blue, 1960-2059)
is median
of for
the 1960-2009.
19 projec on Blue
quan dashed
le
line
the 1960-2009;
95th confidence
interval and
median
and
es mates.
solid
lines demark the 95th confidence interval and median for 1960-2059. (Source:
Iowa DOT)
 WSDOT leveraged a federal flood study for their target river basin—the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Skagit River Flood Risk Management General
Investigation Study (GI study). The GI study provided hydraulic data on major
flood scenarios under existing conditions, including a digital elevation model
(DEM) of the floodplain and water surface elevation and depth for several return
interval floods (influenced by climate change). WSDOT used the information to
determine maximum flood depths and extents for their highway segments under
the different scenarios.
 CAMPO acquired projections of the future magnitude of various 24-hour
precipitation events (e.g., 25-year, 100-year) and used them as input to a
physics-based flood model for the study area that is currently used as part of the
City of Austin’s Flood Early Warning System. The model outputs flood extent, top
width, flow rate, depth, average velocity, and cross-sectional area each of these
future events.
 MnDOT performed a system-level vulnerability screen, and then detailed
analyses on two culverts. For the system-level screen, MnDOT calculated several
hydrological metrics of vulnerability, including the percent change in peak design
flow required for overtopping for each asset. This provided a sense of the
relative sensitivity of each asset to precipitation changes, and required less
precise information about exactly how precipitation or flows may change in that
location. MnDOT also calculated projected stream velocity, belt width to span
length ratio, percent forest land cover in the drainage area, and other exposure
20



metrics. For the site-specific analyses, MnDOT modeled peak flows through the
culverts for various storm event return intervals and climate scenarios using the
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) WinTR-20 program. The
program calculates runoff based on drainage area, land cover, soils, time of
concentration, and 24-hour precipitation.
CTDOT evaluated the long-term
adequacy of their bridge and
culvert structures design
standards using the Rational
Method, SCS Unit Hydrograph,
or USGS Regression Equations
(StreamStats), depending on
watershed size. For each
structure, CTDOT prepared a
graph showing how the design
discharge would increase based
on incremental increases in the
Figure 7. Example CTDOT calculations of
change
in 24-hour 100-year precipitation vs.
precipitation parameter. CTDOT
discharge (Source: CTDOT)
also developed performance
(Rating) curves for the structures showing Headwater Depth versus Peak
Discharge and Outlet Velocity versus Peak Discharge over a range of flow
conditions. These rating curves along with the precipitation graph were used to
evaluate the hydraulic adequacy and assess the adaptive capacity of the
structures.

Storm surge modeling
Sophisticated storm surge modeling may be appropriate for areas with very critical,
expensive infrastructure. For example, in heavily populated areas with critical
transportation infrastructure such as the Central Artery/Tunnel in Boston, highresolution hydrodynamic modeling is warranted due to the importance of
transportation and human impacts, as well as the spatial complexity of terrain and
bathymetry.

21



MassDOT used the ADvanced CIRCulation (ADCIRC) model because of its ability
to accommodate complex geometries and bathymetries and heterogeneous
parameter values. The team coupled ADCRIC with the Simulating WAves
Nearshore (SWAN) Model to simulate storm-induced waves in concert with the
hydrodynamics (the
coupled model is
called the Boston
Harbor Flood Risk
Model (BH-FRM)).
Through model
calibration and
validation, the
project team
demonstrated that
BH-FRM is very good
at simulating
important coastal
Figure 8. BH-FRM wave height results for a typical
storm processes and
extra-topical
(Nor’easter) event (Source: MassDOT)
impacts.

Elevation data
Detailed Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) or other Digital Elevation Model (DEM)
data can be a very valuable resource for conducting flooding vulnerability assessments
when available. Processing the data can often be very resource-intensive (see section
3.2), but the pilot projects agreed that it was worth the resources.




South Florida had the benefit of several available datasets, including LiDARderived elevation data, FEMA flood zone maps, sea level rise inundation maps,
and data on regional transportation network. These data were critical to
identifying which facilities could be inundated, especially in a flat area like South
Florida. However, compiling, reconciling, and cleaning these datasets took
considerable resources in terms of both GIS expertise and computer processing
time.
Hillsborough MPO used the Florida Digital Elevation Model (DEM) from
University of Florida’s GeoPlan to obtain topographical terrain data used to help
identify areas at risk of inundation under different sea level rise and storm surge
scenarios. The DEM was a combination of four separate DEMs covering the
Hillsborough area.
22





MnDOT has detailed LiDAR data statewide; however, it could not be used to
generate drainage areas for each asset because of the presence of “digital dams”
in the dataset (i.e. instances where water is conveyed through an embankment
by a culvert that is not recognized in the LiDAR data). Instead, the pilot found
that StreamStats is an acceptable replacement when LiDAR is inaccurate.
MDSHA worked with the Salisbury University Eastern Shore Regional GIS
Cooperative to develop countywide Digital Elevation Models of water surfaces
using recent LiDAR surveys.

To ward off data collection and management challenges, several pilots found success with
“low-tech” qualitative screening approaches that helped provide a more targeted set of data
requirements.




Maine DOT, for example, manually selected the highest priority asset in each town
without using a Decision Support Tool to rank criticality since local knowledge about
which assets were most vulnerable was easily obtainable; in most towns, there was only
one frequently flooded asset to rank; and the quality and availability of data to input
into the tool was quite variable.
CAMPO conducted a half-day workshop with local stakeholders to determine which
critical assets to focus on for the study.’

Finally, several pilots used a combination of climate projections, asset data, institutional
knowledge, and other indicators to develop vulnerability scores. CAMPO, Maine DOT, MDOT,
MDSHA, MnDOT, and South Florida all used indicators broken into the vulnerability
components of Exposure, Sensitivity, and Adaptive Capacity. NYSDOT developed a Risk Score
based on a Vulnerability Score and a Criticality Score (derived from critical facility data and
functional road class scores). Caltrans and ODOT also calculated vulnerability scores, but
categorized their indicators differently: Caltrans into Impact Potential indicators and Criticality
Indicators, and ODOT into simply Vulnerability indicators. Regardless of the terminology used,
all pilots applied the same general principle that vulnerability is a function of the likelihood of
experiencing an impact (via experiencing a stressor and then experiencing damage or disruption
from that stressor), and the consequences of the impact.
These pilots built on the “indicator libraries” developed in DOT’s Gulf Coast Study Phase 2 and
published in U.S. DOT’s VAST. Most of these pilots used some established indicators from U.S.
DOT and also developed their own based on data available and unique circumstances to the
pilots. The pilots applied these indicators using either VAST, their own spreadsheets, or GIS
analyses.

23

Table 2 provides a consolidated list of vulnerability indicators used across the pilot projects. The
Caltrans and ODOT indicators are labeled with the effective vulnerability component of each
indicator rather than their own terminology to facilitate comparison with the other pilots. Table
2 shows the following:








Certain indicators were popular across many pilots. For example:
o Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT), detour length, FHWA roadway Functional
Classification, truck traffic volume, and evacuation route status were common as
adaptive capacity indicators.
o Scour criticality and various condition ratings (e.g., bridge substructure, bridge
deck, bridge superstructure, culvert, channel, pipe, and pavement condition)
were common as indicators of sensitivity to flooding.
The pilots used a wide variety of flooding exposure indicators. All are similar – related to
the extent and depth of inundation—but arrived at in different ways depending on data
availability. Some used inundation models and others used estimates of stream flow or
other factors to approximate exposure.
Pilots used some of the same indicators in different ways, which illustrates the potential
overlap between vulnerability components. For example:
o MnDOT used stream velocity as an exposure indicator, while CAMPO used it to
indicate sensitivity.
o Maine DOT used elevation above the 100-year base flood elevation as a
sensitivity indicator, while South Florida and CAMPO used it as an exposure
indicator.
All pilots involved stakeholders to select their indicators. For example, MDSHA used a
stakeholder-driven process to select indicators – at a workshop, participants ranked a
list of indicators for their value, regardless of data availability. Then only those
indicators with data were used in the analysis, but the “high value” indicators without
data were identified as targets for future data collection efforts.

24

Table 2. Vulnerability Indicators Used Across FHWA Climate Resilience Pilots
Asset Type
Culverts

Pipes

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

Exposure

Depth of inundation in FEMA 100-year floodplain

X

X

X

Exposure

Percent of segment inundated under given
scenario
Distance to nearest FEMA flood zone

X

X

X

X

X

X

Segment within identified chronic drainage issue
areas*
Modeled SLR Inundation Depth
Modeled Surge Inundation Depth
Proximity to Coastline
Whether asset is located within annual high tide
due to sea level rise*
Whether asset is located within daily high tide due
to sea level rise*
Segment intersects with existing daily high tide*
Segment within identified chronic sea level issue
areas*
Located at low elevation in a coastal area*
Change in Total Annual Precipitation
Percent change in precipitation quantity
constituting 24-hour 100-year event
Percent change in precipitation quantity
constituting 24-hour 30-year event
Percent change in precipitation quantity

X

Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure

Rail

Bridges

X
X

Exposure

Demonstrated past exposure
Whether asset is located in FEMA 100-year flood
plain
Elevation relative to nearest FEMA flood zone

Exposure
Exposure

Indicator

Pumps

Roads

Vulnerability
Component

Pilot(s)

CAMPO, MnDOT
Caltrans, MDSHA,
ODOT, South Florida,
CAMPO, South Florida

X

Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation,
Coastal Flooding
Coastal Flooding
Coastal Flooding
Coastal Flooding
Coastal Flooding

X

Coastal Flooding

Caltrans

X
X

Coastal Flooding
Coastal Flooding

Caltrans
Caltrans

X

Coastal Flooding
Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation

MassDOT, ODOT
MDSHA
MDOT

X

Heavy Precipitation

MDOT

Heavy Precipitation

MDOT

X
X

X

X
X

Climate Stressor(s)

X
X
X

X
X

X

X

25

South Florida
South Florida
South Florida
Caltrans
MassDOT, MDSHA
MassDOT, MDSHA
MassDOT, MDSHA
Caltrans

Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Impact
Potential
(Exposure)
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure
Exposure

constituting 24-hour 50-year event
th
Percent change in 98 percentile precipitation
event*
Belt width to floodplain width ratio*
2
Belt width to span length ratio*
Percent forest land cover in the drainage area*
Percent of drainage area not covered by lakes and
wetlands*
Percent of total segment length at risk of erosion
from the stream channel*
Percent urban land cover in the drainage area*
Stream velocity*
Modeled available freeboard for future rain event*
th
Percent change in 98 percentile runoff event*

Projected change in average seven-day maximum
temperature*
Projected change in number of days per year ≥
100° F
Projected change in number of days per year ≥ 95°
F
Projected change in average summer soil
moisture*
3
Fire Risk, Wildfire Threat *

Rail

Pumps

Pipes

Culverts

Bridges

Indicator

Roads

Asset Type
Vulnerability
Component

X
X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X

Climate Stressor(s)

Pilot(s)

Heavy Precipitation

Caltrans

Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation

MnDOT
MnDOT
MnDOT
MnDOT

Heavy Precipitation

MnDOT

Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation
Runoff

MnDOT
MnDOT
CAMPO
Caltrans

X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X

X

Extreme Heat

CAMPO

X

X

X

Extreme Heat

CAMPO

Extreme Heat

Caltrans

X

X
X

X

X

Wildfire, Drought

CAMPO

X

X

X

Wildfire

Caltrans, CAMPO

2

Belt width refers to the lateral width of stream meanders

3

Wildfire Threat is a field from the Texas Wildfire Risk Assessment Portal (TxWRAP), defined as the “likelihood of a wildfire occurring or burning into an area”

26

X
X

X
X

X
X

Sensitivity

Rail

Bridges
X

Pumps

Roads
X

Sensitivity

Projected change in number of “ice days” (days
with both freezing temperatures and non-trace
precipitation) per year*
Located in Coastal Erosion Hazard Zone*
Whether asset is located in an area with High
Hazard landslide/rock fall ratings, or in an area with
chronic slope movement issues*
Whether asset is located in designated landslide
and rock fall priority area
Dispatch records of weather-related hazard
incidents*
Scour criticality

Exposure

Pipes

Indicator

Culverts

Asset Type
Vulnerability
Component

Pilot(s)

Extreme Cold

CAMPO

X

Coastal Erosion
Landslides

Caltrans
Caltrans, ODOT

X

X

Landslides

ODOT

X

X

All

ODOT

X

Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation

Bridge substructure condition

X

Sensitivity

Bridge deck condition

X

Sensitivity

Culvert condition

X

Sensitivity

Bridge superstructure condition

X

Sensitivity

Bridge age

X

Sensitivity

Asset clearance

X

Sensitivity

Past experience with stressor

X

Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity

Channel condition
Pavement condition
Pipe condition

Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding,
Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation

CAMPO, Maine DOT,
MDSHA, MnDOT,
South Florida
MDSHA, MnDOT,
South Florida,
Maine DOT, MDSHA

Exposure
Exposure

Exposure
Exposure

X

Climate Stressor(s)

X

X

X

X
X

27

MDSHA,
MnDOT, NYSDOT
MDSHA
MDSHA
MDSHA
MDSHA
MnDOT
MnDOT
MnDOT

Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity

Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity

4

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

Rail

Percent change in peak design flow required for
overtopping*
24-hour precipitation design threshold
Average inundation velocity associated with future
rain event
Rail flooding sensitivity rating
Wildfire Threat
Feet of freeboard between the lowest chord of the
bridge structure and the 100-year base flood
elevation
Frequency of culverts or drainage structures during
rain or tidal storm events
Minimum elevation above the 100-year base flood
elevation
Percentage of bridge length at height of lowest
chord
Whether approaches are subject to flooding
Whether road is included in Transportation
Improvement Plan (TIP) for rebuilding and/or
drainage improvements*
Whether road surface is concrete (lower
sensitivity) or asphalt (higher sensitivity)*
Pavement binder
Truck traffic volume
Rail neutral temperature
Freight traffic volume
4
Wildfire sensitivity rating

Pumps

Pipes

Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity

Culverts

Sensitivity
Sensitivity

Bridges

Sensitivity

Indicator

Roads

Asset Type
Vulnerability
Component

Climate Stressor(s)

Pilot(s)

Heavy Precipitation

MnDOT

Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation

CAMPO
CAMPO

Heavy Precipitation
Heavy Precipitation
Coastal Flooding

CAMPO
CAMPO
Maine DOT

X

Coastal Flooding

Maine DOT

X

Coastal Flooding

Maine DOT

X

Coastal Flooding

Maine DOT

X
X

Coastal Flooding
Coastal Flooding

Maine DOT
Maine DOT

X

Coastal Flooding

Maine DOT

Extreme Heat
Extreme Heat
Extreme Heat
Extreme Heat
Wildfire

CAMPO
CAMPO
CAMPO
CAMPO
CAMPO

X

X
X

X

X
X
X
X
X

X

Expert stakeholder judgment about roadways’ wildfire sensitivity

28

Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT)

Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity

Sensitivity

Sensitivity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity

5

Rail

X

Pumps

Bridges

X

5

Pipes

Roads

Values Response Index *
Whether culvert is plastic*
Soil Plasticity Index*
Whether roadway is elevated*
Rail icing sensitivity rating
Maximum cost of historical damages associated
with event (e.g., drainage, slope movements)*
Historical event density as square miles per event
at culvert location (e.g., drainage, erosion, slope
failure)*
Number and rating of climate impact hazard sites
(per maintenance workshop)
Flow control regime*

Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity
Sensitivity

Indicator

Culverts

Asset Type
Vulnerability
Component

X

Climate Stressor(s)

Pilot(s)

Wildfire
Wildfire
Drought
Extreme Cold
Extreme Cold
All

CAMPO
Caltrans
CAMPO
CAMPO
CAMPO
Caltrans

X

All

Caltrans

X

X

All

ODOT

X

X

Heavy Precipitation

MnDOT

X

X

X

All

Detour length

X

X

X

All

FHWA Roadway Functional Classification

X

X

X

All

Heavy commercial average daily traffic / Truck
traffic volume
Whether asset is part of an evacuation route

X

X

X

All

X

X

CAMPO, MDSHA,
MnDOT, NYSDOT,
South Florida
CAMPO, MDSHA,
MnDOT, NYSDOT,
South Florida
Caltrans, CAMPO,
MDSHA, NYSDOT
CAMPO, MnDOT,
NYSDOT
CAMPO, MDSHA

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

All

Values Response Index is a field from the Texas Wildfire Risk Assessment Portal (TxWRAP), defined as “the potential impact of a wildfire on values or assets.”

29

Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity
Adaptive
Capacity

Ridership
X

X

Rail

Pumps

Pipes

Culverts

Bridges

Indicator

Roads

Asset Type
Vulnerability
Component

Climate Stressor(s)

Pilot(s)

X

All

CAMPO, South Florida

X

All

Asset criticality

X

Total Miles of Segment*

X

All

Caltrans, CAMPO,
NYSDOT
Caltrans

Miles of Access Control Highway per Mile of
Segment*
Average Number of Lanes/Mile*

X

All

Caltrans

X

All

Caltrans

Miles of Designated Bike Routes per Mile of
Segment*
Scenic Highways*

X

All

Caltrans

X

All

Caltrans

Miles of Designated Network Truck Route per Mile
of Segment*
Number of bridges over waterways, over 100 feet
in length*
Number of bridges over waterways, less than 100
feet in length*
Number of overpasses and underpasses per road
segment*

X

All

Caltrans

X

All

Caltrans

X

All

Caltrans

X

All

Caltrans

*Indicator not included in the VAST version 1.0 indicator library. Most have been added to the indicator library in VAST version 1.1, except where
deemed too locally-specific to the pilots to be broadly applicable.

30

3.1.3 Integrating into Decision Making
Integrating vulnerability assessment results into decision making processes is important to
ensure that study results are efficiently used in practice. The process of identifying and
evaluating priority adaptation options ensures that adaptation measures incorporated into
decision making are the most appropriate.
3.1.3.1 Identifying, analyzing, and prioritizing adaptation options
The Climate Resilience Pilots identified and evaluated strategies to reduce vulnerability to
climate change and extreme weather events. Several key themes and successful approaches
emerged across the pilots in this process, including the need to involve stakeholders and
consider a wide range of factors in determining which adaptation options to prioritize.
The pilots also demonstrated the importance of considering a wide range of adaptation options
from the outset, including nature-based solutions in addition to infrastructure-based solutions.
For example, pilots considered managing precipitation-driven flow with natural storage
solutions such as wetlands alongside design changes in drainage structures.






NYSDOT developed a culvert prioritization methodology to identify culverts that have
high ecological value. The team evaluated culvert sizing changes to both reduce
potential flooding and improve aquatic organism passage. The environmental analysis
considered state aquatic species of greatest conservation need and identified how much
habitat would be gained if specific culverts were made fish passable for aquatic
organisms. The flexible scoring framework creates an approach that is scalable for
application in both towns and across New York State.
Caltrans’ adaptation assessment focused on engineering-based options but also
explored opportunities to incorporate ecosystem-based adaptation, such as wetlands,
and non-structural solutions, such as traffic routing and policy changes.
WFLHD/ADOT&PF considered a range of adaptation options for their Igloo Creek
landslide study location, from revegetating the hillside with native plants to constructing
a hardened landslide protective shed over the roadway.

Once they brainstormed strategies, pilots also had to evaluate those strategies to decide which
were most appropriate to pursue. Pilots used a variety of approaches to evaluate strategies,
outlined below, ranging from using existing tools to developing and scoring their own criteria,
to using stakeholder input. The types of factors the pilots considered in evaluating adaptation
strategies included: effectiveness, costs, benefits (in terms of avoided damages, avoided delays,
etc.), co-benefits, flexibility of design, and implementation barriers, among others.
Pilot teams’ approaches to evaluating adaptation strategies included:

31

Leverage existing adaptation tools, processes, and datasets to assist in evaluating adaptation
alternatives








MnDOT and ADOT&PF used the General Process for Transportation Facility Adaptation
Assessments (the 11-Step Process) developed under the U.S. DOT Gulf Coast Study
Phase 2 for their asset-specific analysis. The Process provides an 11-step framework to
consider climate change and identify the best methods for decision-making at the
project level. The steps are generally as follows:
o Describe the site context
o Describe the existing/proposed facility
o Identify climate stressors that may impact infrastructure components
o Decide on climate scenarios and determine the magnitude of changes
o Assess performance of the existing/proposed facility
o Identify adaptation option(s)
o Assess performance of the adaptation option(s)
o Conduct an economic analysis
o Evaluate additional decision-making considerations
o Select a course of action
o Plan and conduct ongoing activities
Maine DOT applied a previously-developed infrastructure evaluation tool and modified
it to be specific to transportation assets. The team used the Transportation-version of
the Coastal Adaptation to Sea level rise Tool (T-COAST) to evaluate the costs and
benefits of alternative design structures.
ODOT used ground-based LiDAR datasets to evaluate erosion rates and develop a
graphical representation cross-section of existing terrain and roadway geometry at a
coastal bluff site to assess adaptation options to landslide impacts.
Hillsborough MPO relied on series of models (e.g., sea level rise, storm surge, travel
demand, and REMI (economic). The pilot team reported that, “Although all of these
models have the potential to provide valuable insights, they also require an involved set
of assumptions and calibrations—and results require quality control and interpretation
prior to serving as inputs for subsequent modeling. Agencies conducting first phase
assessments are counseled to focus on mastering one or two models—ensuring that the
results are in line with expectations—and then adding complexity in subsequent
assessments.”

32

Develop and use criteria that systematically evaluate adaptation options in terms of what is
most important to local decision makers and stakeholders




Caltrans District 1 evaluated adaptation options using criteria such as cost, usable life,
level of performance, flexibility of design, and social and environmental considerations
and weighted these criteria based on input from stakeholders and public meetings to
reflect local priorities and values. The criteria methodology was formalized into a tool to
assist planners with the evaluation and selection of adaptation options.
MTC used a screening exercise, followed by a qualitative assessment, to select
adaptation strategies for further development. The screening exercise included
questions on the scale and replicability of the strategy, the barriers to implementation,
the urgency of action, and impacts on society/equity, environment, and economy. The
qualitative assessment used an ordinal ranking system to compare the financial, social,
environmental, and governance-related (e.g., funding, legal barriers) performance of the
strategies (see Figure 9). As a last level of review, the project team used their

33
Figure 9. Ordinal ranking system to compare the governance, financial, environmental, and social
performance of adaptation strategies.

professional experience to select a final set of balanced strategies.
Use cost benefit analysis to compare adaptation options
Pilot teams took a range of approaches to try and estimate the costs and benefits associated
with adaptation options. In some cases, pilot teams found rebuilding in kind to be most costeffective, in other cases they found building higher/stronger to be more cost effective.








MnDOT used the COAST software to calculate expected cumulative damages to
transportation facilities over time, using curves relating water depths to their
probabilities and water depths to damage costs incurred (depth-damage functions). The
model calculates damage according to asset-specific depth-damage functions each time
the facility is “flooded.” MnDOT considered two sets of costs; one that only included the
damage costs incurred by MnDOT (i.e., physical damage repair costs) and one that also
included social costs (i.e., incremental travel time costs to motorists from the detour
and the potential for injury to motorists).
NYSDOT found that many of the studies and tools reviewed were location specific, and
while they provided useful context and information, the primary tools they selected
were relevant at larger geographic scales. Ultimately, the NYSDOT project developed a
framework that enables the user to account for the triple bottom line -- ecological
impacts (e.g., fish, habitat, water quality), economic impacts (e.g., flood damage, travel
delay, tourism), and social impacts (e.g., health and safety). The approach considers
qualitative and quantitative factors and provides a menu of potential benefits that users
can tailor to different geographies and data availability. The team found that the culvert
design features that improve aquatic organism passage often improve climate change
resilience, and vice-versa.
Maine DOT analyzed the cost-effectiveness of various candidate adaptation designs by
comparing the life cycle costs of the replace-in-kind option with the adaptation options
for each asset under a range of sea level rise and storm surge scenarios. The pilot team
created depth-damage functions, which describe the estimated repair cost for an asset
at each flood elevation, and applied it to the scenarios using the T-COAST tool.
Hillsborough MPO used their regional travel demand model, the Tampa Bay Regional
Planning Model, to evaluate the impacts of road closures due to flooding, including
delays, lost trips, and operating costs. The results were then input into the regional
planning commission’s Regional Economic Models Inc. (REMI) model to assess potential
state and regional economic impacts.

Table 3 compares the cost and benefit factors, resources, key findings, and other factors of the
benefit-cost analyses used across the pilots. Most pilots took similar approaches to determine
the net cost-effectiveness of each adaptation strategy (total costs with the adaptation strategy
34

minus total costs without the adaptation strategy), including agency costs of repairs as well as
societal costs from transportation disruptions. Across the board, the pilots found the benefitcost analyses valuable but demanding, in terms of time, data, and expertise.

35

Table 3. Overview of Climate Resilience Pilot Benefit-Cost Analysis Approaches
Impacts of Climate Change
(Benefits of Adaptation)

Pilot
Hillsborough
MPO

Maine
DOT

MnDOT









Costs of Adaptation
Strategies

Final Measure

Scope

Tools/Resources Used

Regional mobility (hours 
of delay, VMT, lost trips)
Regional economy
(using REMI model
based on changes to
regional mobility) (jobs,
income, gross regional
product)

Construction
and
maintenance
costs



Construction
and
maintenance
costs

Life cycle costeffectiveness
(estimated net
benefit: Costs –
Avoided Losses)

3 assets, 2
strategies
each



Construction
costs

Life cycle costeffectiveness
(estimated net
benefit: Costs –

2 assets
(culverts), 3
strategies
each



Physical damages,
repair costs

Physical damages,
repair costs
Travel time costs from
detours



Life cycle costeffectiveness
(estimated net
benefit: Costs –
Avoided Losses)

5 assets, 3
strategies
each







36

Key Findings

Travel demand
model (mobility
impacts of closures)
REMI – regional
economic impacts
FDOT Generic Cost
per Mile models
Unit cost estimates
from consultant
engineers



T-COAST model











COAST (depthdamage functions)
MnDOT standard
assumptions (travel



Results highly dependent
on assumptions
Three of five strategies
not cost-effective
(possibly because of
overly conservative
assumptions)
Most cost-effective
strategy, adaptation for
Memorial Highway,
would cost $4.2 million
but avoid $6.3-$25.3
million in damages from
a single storm.
Cost-effectiveness varies
greatly by asset.
For example, adaptation
for bridges in
Bowdoinham could avoid
up to $684,000 in
lifecycle damages from
sea level rise alone
(excluding storm surge),
while adaptation for a
culvert in the
Scarborough could cost
between $0.5-2 million
over its lifetime.
“Low-end” adaptation
most cost-effective
strategy in 11/12
scenarios.

Impacts of Climate Change
(Benefits of Adaptation)

Pilot



Costs of Adaptation
Strategies

Final Measure

Scope

Tools/Resources Used

Avoided Losses)

Vehicle operating costs
from detours
Cost of potential injury

time, vehicle
operating costs,
injury cost)

Key Findings




MTC






NYSDOT











Impacts on mobility
(VMT, delays, GHG
emissions, air pollutant
emissions)
Acres of wetland lost
Equity impacts



Travel time costs from

detours
Vehicle operating costs
from detours
Impacts of lost access to
fire stations, emergency
services, and hospitals
Potential for fatalities
and injuries
Physical damages,
repair costs (including
damaged property)
Disruptions to freight
movement
Environmental impacts
(fish and wildlife

Construction
and
maintenance
costs

n/a

3 strategies
(1 per
geographic
area
studied)



Construction,
maintenance,
rehabilitation ,
and
replacement
costs

Unique hybrid
approach of
qualitative and
quantitative
benefits.

10 assets
(culverts); 2
strategies
each
(replaceme
nt or
repair)

Developed NYSDOT tool, 
drawing from:
 U.S. DOT Economic
Analysis Primer
 FHWA Operations
Benefit/Cost
Analysis Desk

Reference
 U.S. DOT TIGER
Benefit-Cost
Analysis Guidance
Documents
 TRB Benefit-Cost
Analysis website
 FEMA Benefit-Cost
Analysis Tool

Total annual
benefits = (social
benefits +
economic benefits)
* environmental
benefits

37

Engineering
consultant
estimates



Adding two cells to
Culvert 5722 would save
MnDOT $85,000 to
$158,000 over its lifetime
(not counting societal
benefits).
Most cost-effective
strategy can depend on
whether social costs are
included.
A conceptual Bay Bridge
“living levee” and
breakwater would cost
about $17 million but
protect about 40 acres of
wetlands and avoid $15
million per day in travel
delays, among other
unquantified benefits.
Developed a benefits
valuation approach to
include social, economic,
and environmental data
in decision making, when
data are available.
A new decision tool helps
determine when a culvert
replacement is warranted
based on risk
(vulnerability and
criticality), environmental
importance, and
economic benefits and
costs.

Pilot

ODOT

WFLHD

Impacts of Climate Change
(Benefits of Adaptation)
populations, habitats,
stream erosion, water
quality, recreation)*
 Physical damages,
repair costs
 Travel time costs from
detours
 Vehicle operating costs
from detours
 Potential for accidents
 Regional economic
impacts





Physical damages,
repair costs
Operations and
maintenance, including
costs to monitor
conditions
Socioeconomic impacts

Costs of Adaptation
Strategies



Construction
and
maintenance
costs

Final Measure

Benefit/Cost Ratio,
Net Present Value
(B-C)

Scope

2 sites, 1
strategy
each

Tools/Resources Used







Construction
and future
rehabilitation
costs

Benefit/Cost Ratio,
Net Present Value

3 sites, 6
total
strategies



Key Findings

BCA values and
methods from
federal TIGER Grant
application
guidance
Statewide
Integrated Model
(SWIM) for regional
economic analysis



Engineering
consultant
estimates







*The NYSDOT pilot used a multiplier to estimate environmental benefits rather than direct valuation.

38

In the two sites studied,
low traffic volumes and
available detours meant
minimal impacts and,
therefore, minimal
benefits of adaptation
options.
Corridor approach to
benefit-cost analysis may
be more appropriate.
The case studies revealed
relatively low-cost
options for
implementation.
In Alaska, significant
investments are made
for the good of a small
number of individuals.
Traditional BCA
assessments may need to
consider broader factors
of concern to reflect
appropriate response
measures.

The pilots also engaged stakeholders to vet
adaptation options, as adaptation strategies are more
likely to be successful if developed through a
participatory process involving internal agency partners
as well as external partners.






“While a standardized qualitative
assessment can be a good way to
evaluate the performance of
strategies, it should always be
supplemented by the local
knowledge and expertise of
stakeholders and agencies”.

MTC established stakeholder groups in each of
their three geographic focus areas that
encompassed a wide range of participants
—MTC Pilot Team
including transit operators; flood control
districts; local government; utilities; parks; non-profits; community based organizations;
homeowners associations (HOAs); and federal research agencies. These stakeholders
provided critical reviews of the exposure information, and helped to review and develop
the adaptation strategies.
Caltrans District 1 held public meetings in each of the four counties in the study area
mid-way through the project to update the public on the project and seek input on
adaptation priorities and criteria. Throughout the project process, Caltrans engaged 25
members of its Technical Advisory Group, 59 regional government and regulatory
stakeholders, and 119 other members of the public.
CTDOT considered the location of assets in relation to emergency routes and emergency
services, such as fire stations; police stations and barracks; emergency medical services;
hospitals; public works departments; and emergency shelters in their criticality
assessment. The study team also conducted public outreach to the elected leaders,
emergency responders and public works department in the study region to learn about
the anecdotal or local perspective on which structures were more critical than others
that may not be evident through the roadway or hydrography datasets.

In addition, the pilots engaged low income and other disadvantaged communities, in addition
to other public and private stakeholders, where possible, in the adaptation strategy
development and evaluation processes.




WSDOT conducted interviews with two tribes resident in the basin about existing
conditions, including existing “areas of concern” regarding flood hazards and related to
critical infrastructure like firehouses and medical clinics.
Caltrans District 1 conducted outreach with key stakeholders, including local tribes in all
four of the project’s pilot locations. For example, the pilot team gave a presentation
about the project at a Tribal Climate Adaptation Forum hosted by the Robinson
Rancheria of Pomo Indians in Lake County. All four of the project’s pilot locations were

39



within ancestral tribal territories, and two (in Lake and Mendocino Counties) were
directly adjacent to tribal properties.
MTC considered the impacts (positive or negative) on disadvantaged communities when
evaluating potential adaptation options. For example, they considered the ability of the
strategy to protect transit routes in or within ½ mile of communities of concern, as well
as the ability of the strategy to minimize vehicle hours of delay for trips in the lowest
income category.

3.1.3.2 Incorporating results into transportation programs and processes
Integrating climate and vulnerability considerations into existing decision making processes
puts the findings of a vulnerability assessment and adaptation evaluation into practice.
Incorporating climate change can improve existing practices and is easier to implement this way
than treating it as a separate activity.
Several pilot teams developed resources to incorporate climate information into engineering
design.






CTDOT is preparing a technical memorandum providing recommendations to Department
staff and Consulting Engineers. This memo will include guidance on using Precip.net and
NOAA Atlas 14 data. Now that NOAA has released the Atlas 14 data for the Northeastern
U.S., CTDOT plans to update the Drainage Manual to require NOAA Atlas 14 as the source
for precipitation data for the design of Department facilities.
Iowa DOT determined engineering design metrics could be developed from streamflow
simulation over a long, continuous period spanning historical and future climate conditions
(e.g., continuous streamflow for 1960 – 2059). To facilitate the use of this information, Iowa
DOT developed an innovative flood design graph for bridge vulnerability analysis that
conveys succinctly to bridge engineers the historical annual peak streamflow as well as
design metrics based on historical data and climate projection data. However, Iowa DOT
cautions that the graphs should only be used with careful interpretation since it contains
both historical and projected data that is not strictly fair to compare.
MassDOT developed high-resolution flooding projections for use in future project design
that are being used not only by MassDOT, but by other organizations in the Boston area.

Several pilot teams aligned their assessments with long range planning and other existing
practices, which facilitated the integration of the results into decision making.


TDOT evaluated vulnerabilities to current infrastructure and projected use of assets based
on their current Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP). The temporal scope of the study
extended through the year 2040, which aligned with the horizon year of the plan as well as
capital and rehabilitation cycles.
40








ODOT reviewed federal, state, and local land use regulations in order to understand the
restrictions that may limit the feasibility of large coastal adaptation projects.
Hillsborough MPO conducted its assessment in support of its 2040 LRTP. Project findings,
such as inundation scenarios and viable adaptation measures, have been cost-effectively
incorporated into the LRTP.
Caltrans District 1 is considering updates to Caltrans planning and design policies to
integrate climate, such as updating the maintenance and repair data collection and tracking
systems to collect data related to extreme weather events. Caltrans recognizes the need for
greater collaboration between permitting authorities and project stakeholders to conduct
advanced planning and permitting for adaptation options that can be implemented after
emergency events.
MDSHA is using the results of this study to delineate a “Climate Change Impact Zone.” This
zone is intended to help SHA screen new project plans and designs for future climate
impacts.

A number of pilot teams streamlined climate change adaptation planning with asset
management.






MnDOT used information from their asset management system as indicators of
vulnerability; however, they recognize that this system could be improved. For future
efforts, they are considering gathering data on waterway opening dimensions and other
relevant variables that would be useful to future flood vulnerability assessments, and
incorporating vulnerability assessment scores into asset management databases and the
asset management plan. Moving forward, they recommend including monitoring and
recording asset performance during weather events. Specific items that could be recorded
include frequency of overtopping, duration of closures, whether injuries resulted from the
overtopping, and any damage costs. Instances where an adaptive design prevented the
incurrence of costs relative to a traditional design should also be noted and a tally
maintained of costs avoided; eventually this could be used to determine whether the
additional costs incurred for the adaptation were justified.
CTDOT is coordinating with the Bridge Management group to determine how to integrate
the results of the hydraulic evaluations and criticality assessments into the bridge inventory
for future reference by the Department. One means would be to upload the structure
summary reports and criticality sheets (produced during the pilot) into the bridge asset files
located in their project management file system, “ProjectWise”.
Iowa DOT is adding data generated during the pilot project into their BridgeWatch program,
a real-time bridge monitoring and alert system. BridgeWatch provides real-time information
about bridge and stream conditions to help Iowa DOT decision-makers take a proactive
approach to public safety during potential overtopping events.
41



NCTCOG considered doing an analysis of how extreme weather events affected pavement
deterioration since the City of Dallas has a robust dataset of historical street conditions,
including the extent and severity of pavement distress. However, the database system is
currently not configured in such a way to indicate that extreme weather effects are a direct
cause to specific street section degradation or failures. As an outcome of the pilot project,
NCTCOG is recommending that the City improve its monitoring of weather-related stresses
as part of its pavement management system.

These types of projects can create an opportunity to get agencies to communicate and
coordinate efforts to address climate change. The pilot teams engaged and coordinated with
various partners and stakeholders on the vulnerability assessments and adaptation analyses,
which were important outcomes of the projects. A number of the pilots will continue to work
with partners to plan for climate.


WSDOT’s pilot project demonstrated the value of working with federal and local
partners such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, flood managers, and county public
works departments. Such partnerships allow the organizations to inform each other’s
work and reduce potential future conflicts. For example, the project identified locations
where WSDOT, if unaware of the Corps’ tentatively selected plans or local flood
improvements, could inadvertently make investments that would block the flow of
water that the Corps assumed would occur. Following on the pilot project, WSDOT is
working with the state departments of Commerce and Ecology to develop guidance for
local vulnerability assessments. WSDOT intends to coordinate with local governments
on integrating climate resilience considerations into their long-range planning efforts.

3.2 Challenges Encountered
The pilot teams also encountered challenges to the assessment process and identified lessons
learned that can be applied to future projects. This section includes a few common challenges
and illustrative examples of ways the pilot teams reconciled them.
When defining the scope of their analyses, several pilots had difficulty deciding on the
appropriate scale for assessment. The project scoping phase should include consideration of
what data are available, since the scope of the assessment may need to consider the quality
and availability of the data.


NCTCOG found it challenging to collect comprehensive and consistent data from across a
twelve-county metropolitan planning area, more than 230 local government units, and
multiple transportation providers. As a result, the study assumed adaptive capacity was
constant throughout the study region since data was not available to support the analysis.

42

The pilot teams encountered challenges with data collection and processing. For some pilot
teams, there were several available sources of data available and the pilots were overwhelmed
with data processing. Pilots also encountered a number of challenges in identifying the best
data to work with and applying it, especially when there was imperfect or missing data and
uncertainty in the climate models. Several pilots were able to use qualitative screening
techniques to minimize their data collection needs.








MDOT did not have digitized FEMA floodplain data for approximately 60 percent of the
state. Therefore, the study team chose not to incorporate 100-year floodplain data into its
analysis, but did flag assets within the National Flood Hazard Layer coverage area and the
100-year floodplain in the final vulnerability assessment.
MDOT found that, for some climate scenarios, changes in precipitation ranged between
models from very little to a greater than 60 percent increase. To deal with uncertainty, the
study used five climate models to capture the range of potential future climate impacts.
MnDOT found that uncertainty in the downscaled precipitation data is uncomfortable for
engineers who have worked primarily with statistically derived data from the past to
identify asset risk. An indicator for capturing differences in projected future 24-hour
precipitation depths within each asset’s drainage area was considered. The Climate
Advisory Committee believed, however, that any variations in climate model projections
across an area as small as a district would not be reliable. Thus, the assessment took a
sensitivity-based approach to capturing vulnerability, asking, “Given what we know about
each asset and its environmental setting, what percentage change in the design storm
would be required to overtop the roadway?” All other metrics being equal, assets that
required less of a change in design flow to overtop were considered more vulnerable to
potential increases in precipitation.
Iowa DOT used complex modeling to translate climate model information into future
streamflow which required significant computing infrastructure that is common with
academic research institutions but may not be available to most public agencies and
consulting firms. The use of cloud computing could make access to this computing power
much more cost effective.

While coordination with partners and stakeholders is a valuable part of the assessment and
integration process, there were a few challenges that pilot teams had to overcome, including
logistics and communication.


Hillsborough MPO engaged with a pre-existing hazard mitigation strategy working group
composed of government officials, representatives from local businesses, and private
citizens. The pilot team found that while this technical advisory group was a valuable
resource for the project, the composition of attendees varied significantly across project
43



meetings, making continuity a challenge. If needed again in the future, Hillsborough MPO
would consider assembling a smaller, dedicated technical advisory group that could meet
more frequently and provide consistent feedback.
CTDOT found that there needs to be a common understanding of the purpose of adaptation
strategies among all stakeholders (e.g., local towns, private land owners) due to the
potential for increased downstream flooding when structures are upsized.

A few pilots encountered difficulty in the review and verification of assessment results. They
needed to determine what type of review and verification of results is needed and by whom.
Additionally, several pilots noted that the data obtained from other entities should be vetted to
ensure that it can be appropriately applied to the project.


As Iowa DOT and MassDOT found, it can be challenging to obtain critical peer review of the
pilot projects’ new methods and the findings that result. Exactly how climate change will
affect infrastructure systems is an emerging area of research in which there are few
established best practices. The pilots, as a community of practice, embraced this challenge
and worked together to provide feedback to each other and develop best practices. In
addition, they’ve given several presentations to share their research and gather feedback
on the approaches used.

The community of practice created through the pilot program provided an opportunity for
pilots to share these challenges and how they learned to overcome them. The pilots also
conferred regarding outstanding needs and recommendations for FHWA to continue to support
state and local transportation agencies in addressing some of these challenges (see sections 4
and 5 below).

4 Needs
The Climate Resilience Pilots have made significant advances in the “state of the practice” in
adapting transportation systems to climate change. In the process, they identified several
needs for additional information and resources to continue the work of making our
transportation systems more resilient. Simultaneously, the pilot projects have made advances
against those needs and developed resources to help other agencies.

4.1 Information Needs
Data. In order to fully understand vulnerabilities and take action to address them,
transportation agencies need access to comprehensive datasets that can support their
analyses. These include data on transportation assets (e.g., from asset management systems),
LiDAR or other elevation data, and relevant data on climate projections. Data will never be

44

perfect, but continuous improvement is needed to better understand vulnerabilities and
adaptation tradeoffs.
Information on historical impacts and associated costs. Such information—such as the
duration and extent of road closures, labor and maintenance costs associated with weatherrelated repairs, and economic implications of road closures—can help decision makers
understand the potential impacts, in dollar terms, of extreme weather impacts. Information
about the broader economic implications of transportation disruptions (e.g., if an interstate is
closed, if industrial routes are closed, if local business and industry are affected by road
closures) is also critical to informed decisions, but typically difficult to obtain. Some pilots were
able to calculate historical costs from weather events (see Caltrans, Maine DOT, MTC, NCTCOG,
and ODOT pilot reports).
Information on “default” values for costs and benefits
NYSDOT hoped to create a
of adaptation. More information is needed for
quantitative adaptation modeling
transportation agencies to be able to quantify, in dollar
tool but found that this was hard
terms, the costs and benefits of adaptation strategies.
to do with limited locally-specific
For example, it would be helpful to have default values
economic values.
or unit costs for adaptation measures by facility type
and region. In addition, better information is needed,
Instead, the team developed a
as mentioned above, to help quantify adaptation
benefits valuation approach for
benefits such as those that are more commonly valued
other transportation agencies to
in a transportation context (e.g., safety) and those that
use to calculate the social,
are more difficult to value (e.g., community or
economic, and environmental
economic effects). In the meantime, some pilots
benefits of adaptation measures.
developed their own estimates for general costs of
The NYSDOT report includes
adaptation strategies (see the Hillsborough MPO,
Maine DOT, MnDOT, MTC, NYSDOT, ODOT, and WFLHD several default values to calculate
adaptation benefits and costs of
pilot reports for additional details). NYSDOT, in
different culvert design options.
particular, developed a framework designed for other
transportation agencies to use to assign economic
values to social, economic, and environmental benefits of adaptation. Their report includes
several default values, and noted that the lack of developing locally-specific data was a limiting
factor.

4.2 Other Resource Needs
Additional guidance on using climate information. Climate change projections are readily
available, but there are so many data sources and options that it is often well outside the
expertise of DOT staff to sort through it. Although several resources exist for how to use climate
45

information from organizations like FHWA, the Infrastructure Climate Network (ICNet), and
National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) (see Appendix A), the pilots
suggested additional guidance is necessary specifically for transportation agencies on what
climate information to use, where to find it, how to use it (e.g., what types of climate data are
needed for different types of analyses).
Additional guidance on conducting benefit cost assessments for climate adaptation.
Transportation agencies need more examples and information on how to incorporate climate
change into benefit-cost assessments and other economic assessments of project viability. For
example, such guidance would include information on how to find and apply existing data on
costs and benefits (including putting values on benefits), assign probabilities to climate change
scenarios, scale inputs, forecast socioeconomic variables, do Monte Carlo analyses, and use
other economic analysis techniques. Transportation agency staff may have limited expertise in
economic analysis, so guidance should be tailored to that audience and, for example, include
default values, be realistic about what data can and should be used, and provide examples of
how others have incorporated benefit-cost analyses into decision making. Any processes in
future guidance or tools also needs to be transparent to enhance acceptance and
understanding of results by engineers and others involved in the decision making process.
Several resources, listed in Appendix A, already exist to help organizations perform economic
analyses, and the pilot projects provide several examples of how to perform transportation
climate change-specific analyses (see Table 3). In addition, the NYSDOT pilot developed
guidance specifically for this purpose.
Guidance on integration of vulnerability assessment results and adaptation into
transportation planning. Though the Climate Resilience Pilots are a good start, the
transportation community needs more guidance and examples of how to actually integrate
understanding of climate risk into transportation decision-making. For example, transportation
agencies could use a data collection checklist of additional climate and asset information that
would be helpful when developing or updating asset management systems. This would have
helped the South Florida pilot project, for instance, which could not easily find data at the asset
level that would have been helpful for their hydrology and vulnerability analysis (e.g., bridge
deck elevations, size of openings).

5 Pilot Recommendations for FHWA
Throughout the pilot process and in their final reports, the 19 pilot teams identified specific
recommendations for ways FHWA can continue to support state and local transportation
agencies as they attempt to increase their resilience to extreme weather events and climate
change. These recommendations fall into five overall categories.
46

Further refine the Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment
Framework to reflect lessons learned from pilot projects. The vast majority of
recommendations from the pilots were specific suggestions to improve the content and scope
of the FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework. For
example, recommendations include:











Expand the “Integrate into Decision-Making” component of the framework to help agencies
move beyond vulnerability assessments. For example, this may include guidance on using
risk-based decision-making in engineering, information on how to incorporate climate
change projections into design, and guidance on how to go about making the difficult
decisions associated with climate change adaptation (e.g., when do I abandon this road?).
Move toward an FHWA Adaptation Framework.
Expand the discussion on the appropriate use of climate data in vulnerability assessments
and engineering decisions. For example, elaborate on the uncertainty associated with
climate projections, what climate data can and cannot be used for, a recommended process
for selecting climate models, and how to interpret projections when the directionality does
not agree.
Add guidance on identifying and evaluating adaptation measures.
Expand the framework to more explicitly address issues related to operations and
maintenance, as opposed to infrastructure only.
Include more detail and examples about how to implement vulnerability assessments.
Incorporate specific lessons learned by pilots into relevant sections of the framework. For
example, emphasize the importance of stakeholder engagement and note challenges and
best practices associated with data collection.
Incorporate examples from this round of pilot projects into the “Examples from Practice”
call-outs.

Additional details on specific recommendations are provided in the pilot final reports.
Provide resources to help agencies evaluate the costs and benefits of adaptation strategies.
These resources could fall within an updated FHWA Framework, but would require sufficient
new content and research that it merits a separate category. The FHWA pilots program has
helped agencies assess their vulnerabilities and some have begun to evaluate and implement
strategies to adapt to those vulnerabilities. However, guidance on the appropriate ways to

47

evaluate the costs and benefits of adaptation strategies is still limited.6 FHWA could help
advance the state of the practice through the following activities, for example:







Develop an adaptation economic analysis resource guide documenting existing
resources (e.g., guidance, tools, and data).
Compile the most useful data related to valuing benefits of adaptation, such as
databases with monetized values for lost travel time, ecosystem damages, and other
key data. Pair this with case studies of assessments and results that could be applied to
other localities or areas and a table of default values.
Develop a data collection guide with steps that agencies can take in the near-term to
improve their ability to conduct adaptation benefit/cost analyses in the future. For
example, this guide would provide data points to collect and explain why they are useful
in understanding costs, benefits, and effectiveness. For example, frequency and
duration of weather-related road closures is a helpful data point to understand how
weather events disrupt the system and what the benefits of avoided disruptions might
be.
Develop a framework for economic analysis of adaptation strategies, covering options
for economic analyses (e.g., benefit/cost ratios, return-on-investment analyses, multicriteria analysis), the pros and cons of different analysis options, and ways to
incorporate non-quantitative factors in decision-making.

Provide additional tools and resources developed during the pilot projects. Several of the
pilots developed resources and processes that could serve as useful templates for other
agencies. FHWA could host these resources on the Virtual Framework for Vulnerability
Assessment website (the Virtual Framework). In addition, FHWA could help make some of the
resources more user-friendly for other users. For example, the Tennessee DOT pilot developed
a method to extract and assemble National Weather Service data to produce historic
frequencies of extreme weather events. This process could be turned into a tool to make it
easier for others to replicate.
Facilitate coordination with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and other federal agencies. The
WSDOT pilot, in particular, focused on the opportunities for collaboration between USACE flood
management studies and DOT flood resilience efforts. In light is the overlap between USACE
and U.S. DOT work in the area of flood resilience, WSDOT recommends that DOT work with
USACE to develop a strategy for integrating their planning efforts and reduce regulatory

6

NCHRP 20-101, “Guidelines to Incorporate the Costs and Benefits of Adaptation Measures in Preparation for
Extreme Weather Events,” is a starting point to address this need and expected to be complete in mid-2017.

48

barriers across the two agencies. Similar opportunities likely exist with other federal agencies,
so FHWA should continue to participate and engage in inter-agency coordination.
Help secure additional funding for analysis and implementation of adaptation strategies. The
nineteen pilot teams are now poised to implement strategies to adapt to projected climate
changes. However, funding is an oft-cited barrier to changing project design or embarking on
specific projects—particularly infrastructure-related projects—to address vulnerabilities. Pilot
teams requested that FHWA provide or otherwise facilitate access to funding to carry on the
work of the pilots and advance the state of the practice into implementation of adaptation
strategies.

49

Appendix A – Resources
This list provides resources used or introduced by the 2013-2015 Climate Resilience Pilots.
Additional adaptation resources for transportation agencies can be found in the Resource
Database of the FHWA Virtual Framework at
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/adaptation_framework/r
esources/.
Climate Data


ADCIRC Model
The Advanced Circulation model is a two dimensional, depth-integrated, barotropic
time-dependent, long wave, hydrodynamic circulation model. This model is commonly
used to predict coastal inundation caused by storm surge. It is a finite-element
hydrodynamic model that uses the generalized wave-continuity equation formulation
based on well known, shallow-water equations. This model is excellent for coastal
regions where complex geometries and bathymetries demand variable resolution and it
has the ability to include a wide variety of meteorological forcing. http://adcirc.org/



CMIP Climate Data Processing Tool
Microsoft Excel tool that translates downscaled climate model data from the DCHP
database (below) into more relatable terms for transportation planners and engineers.
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/publications_and_t
ools/



Downscaled CMIP3 and CMIP5 Climate and Hydrology Projections (DCHP)
Provides downscaled climate projections at spatial and temporal scales relevant to some
of the watershed and basin-scale decisions facing water and natural resource managers
and planners dealing with climate change. Content is based on global climate
projections from the World Climate Research Programme's (WCRP's) Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project phase 3 (CMIP3) multi-model dataset referenced in the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report and the
phase 5 (CMIP5) multi-model dataset that informed the IPCC Fifth Assessment. Data are
available in bias corrected constructed analogs (BCCA) daily climate projections and bias
corrected spatially downscaled (BCSD) monthly climate projections.
http://gdo-dcp.ucllnl.org/downscaled_cmip_projections/



SimCLIM
Proprietary software with maps, graphs and charts of various aspects of historical and
future climate change projection data that can be generated spatially for cities,
counties, provinces, nations and the world.
http://www.climsystems.com/simclim/



Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) Model
50

SLOSH is a computerized numerical model developed by the National Weather Service
to estimate storm surge heights resulting from historical, hypothetical, or predicted
hurricanes by taking into account the atmospheric pressure, size, forward speed, and
track data. These parameters are used to create a model of the wind field which drives
the storm surge.
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/surge/slosh.php


StreamStats
Developed by USGS, StreamStats allows users to easily obtain historical records of
streamflow statistics, drainage-basin characteristics, and other information for userselected sites on streams.
http://water.usgs.gov/osw/streamstats/



USGS Geo Data Portal
Portal that provides a catalog of available downscaled climate projections and other
large data products that summarize or predict climate and land use conditions.
http://cida.usgs.gov/gdp/



Vflo®
A gridded physics-based hydrologic model used for simulation of flood risks that relies
on geospatial data to represent the land use and land cover affecting runoff velocities,
infiltration properties of the soils, channel hydraulic capacity of streams and drainage
ways, and the terrain slope and drainage direction in each grid cell of the model.



Sea Level Scenario Sketch Planning Tool
A tool for Florida funded by the FDOT Office of Policy Planning and developed by the
University of Florida GeoPlan Center. This is a planning tool for preliminary assessment
of vulnerable transportation infrastructure due to sea level change.
http://sls.geoplan.ufl.edu/



US Army Corps Sea Level Rise Curve Calculator
This calculator consists of a web-based tool that accepts user input such as project start
date, selection of an appropriate NOAA long term tide gauge, and project life span, to
produce a table and graph of the projected sea level changes for the respective project.
The calculator was developed for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) sea level
change scenarios, but can also be used to develop scenarios from NOAA (2012) and the
National Research Council (NRC, 2011).
http://www.corpsclimate.us/ccaceslcurves.cfm

Other Data


USDA’s Risk of Human Desertification Map

51

A map based on an overlay of the global desertification map and a global population
density map that shows risk of human induced desertification globally.
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/soils/use/?cid=nrcs142p2_054004.


NOAA Atlas 14 Point Precipitation Frequency Estimates
A tool created by NOAA to give estimates of precipitation frequency in the United
States. This tool gives 90% confidence intervals and supplementary information about a
selected location. The precipitation frequency estimates are based on frequency
analysis of partial duration series.
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/pfds_map_cont.html?bkmrk=az



Keetch-Byram Drought Index
US Forest Service Wildland Fire Assessment System index of number representing the
net effect of evapotranspiration and precipitation in producing cumulative moisture
deficiency in deep duff and upper soil layers. It is a continuous index, relating to the
flammability of organic material in the ground.
http://www.wfas.net/index.php/keetch-byram-index-moisture--drought-49



USGS GeoData Portal
Portal that provides a catalog of available downscaled climate projections and other
large data products that summarize or predict climate and land use conditions.
http://cida.usgs.gov/gdp/

Data Collection


Mobile Information Collection Application (MICA)
A mobile reporting application developed by USACE’s Engineering Research and
Development Center Information Technology Laboratory, provides easy-to-use, costeffective method for fully-digital data collection and transfer from in-the-field. This
technology has been effectively used to capture the impact of extreme weather events
such as flooding and hurricanes.
http://www.erdc.usace.army.mil/Media/FactSheets/FactSheetArticleView/tabid/9254/
Article/476670/mobile-computing-mica-and-blue-roof.aspx

Vulnerability and Adaptation Methodologies


FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
A guide for transportation agencies interested in assessing their vulnerability to climate
change and extreme weather events. It gives an overview of key steps in defining
objectives and scope, assessing vulnerability, and incorporating results into decision
making. The framework draws from the experience and work of the agencies involved in
FHWA's 2010-2011 Climate Change Vulnerability and Risk Assessment Pilot Program.
52

https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/publications_and
_tools/vulnerability_assessment_framework/


Hydraulic Engineering Circular (HEC) No. 17: The Design of Encroachments on Flood
Plains Using Risk Analysis
HEC 17 provides a methodology for following a least total expected cost (LTEC) design
process. This document was drafted in the 1980’s to characterize the risk of a particular
site and build according to risk-based, life-cycle costs. FHWA is in the process of
updating this document.
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/engineering/hydraulics/library_listing.cfm



Hydraulic Engineering Circular (HEC) No. 25: Highways in the Coastal Environment
This manual provides guidance for the analysis, planning, design and operation of
highways in the coastal environment. The focus is on roads and bridges (highways) near
the coast that are always, or occasionally during storms, influenced by coastal tides and
waves. It is in the process of being updated to provide guidance on incorporating coastal
climate change hazards into project design.
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/engineering/hydraulics/library_listing.cfm



MDSHA Hazard Vulnerability Index (HVI)
The team developed the HVI to evaluate sea level rise and flooding vulnerability of
roads. HVI is a calculation to compare risk of road segments based on functional class,
evacuation route designation, and extent and depth of projected flooding. Available in
Section 2.2.5 of the MDSHA Climate Resilience Pilot final report (October 2014).



Monte Carlo Simulations
This is a broad class of computational algorithms that rely on repeated random sampling
to obtain numerical results; typically, one runs simulations many times over in order to
obtain the distribution of an unknown probabilistic entity (e.g., the probability of a
particular hurricane strength and trajectory).



Procedures to Evaluate Sea Level Change: Impacts Responses and Adaptation
Provides guidance for understanding the direct and indirect physical and ecological
effects of projected future sea level change on USACE projects and systems of projects
and considerations for adapting to those effects.
http://www.iwr.usace.army.mil/Media/NewsStories/tabid/11418/Article/494304/proce
dures-to-evaluate-sea-level-change-impacts-responses-and-adaptation.aspx



U.S. DOT Gulf Coast Phase 2, 11-step General Process for Transportation Facility
Adaptation Assessments
This Process is contained in the Gulf Coast Study Phase 2 Task 3.2 Engineering Analysis
and Assessments Report. It provides a methodology for determining how specific
transportation assets could be affected by climate change, and assessing which
53

adaptation options are effective and feasible.
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/ongoing_and_curr
ent_research/gulf_coast_study/


U.S. DOT Vulnerability Assessment Scoring Tool (VAST)
Microsoft Excel tool that guides the user through the process of conducting an
indicator-based vulnerability screen of selected assets.
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/publications_and_t
ools/

Benefit-Cost Guidance and Tools


FEMA Benefit-Cost Analysis Tool
Provides formulas and standard values associated with the mitigation of damage from a
range of natural hazards, including floods.
http://www.fema.gov/benefit-cost-analysis



FHWA Operations Benefit/Cost Analysis Desk Reference
Guidance from the Federal Highway Administration that provides detailed information
on how to conduct benefit-cost analysis of operations strategies for transportation
departments.
http://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/fhwahop12028/fhwahop12028.pdf



Hazard Mitigation Cost Effectiveness (HMCE) Tool
The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) developed this tool to help transit agencies
determine the long-term cost effectiveness of proposed adaptation measures. Use of
the tool was required for submission to the Hurricane Sandy Competitive Resilience
Notice of Funding Availability.
http://www.fta.dot.gov/documents/FTA-User_Guide-final.pdf



Hazus
Hazus was created by FEMA and is a nationally applicable standardized methodology
that contains models for estimating potential losses from earthquakes, floods, and
hurricanes. It can estimate physical damage, economic loss, and social impacts from
current extreme weather events.
http://www.fema.gov/hazus



NYSDOT Initial Approach for Economic Valuation of Road-Stream Crossings in the
Context of Climate Change
The team assembled information from the literature and previous case studies including
existing methods for calculating the costs and benefits (economic, social, and
environmental) of adaptation at road-stream crossings. Available in “Objective 3” and
Appendix D of the NYSDOT Climate Resilience Pilot final report (December 2015).
54



Regional Economic Model, Inc. (REMI)
A dynamic forecasting and policy analysis tool that can be variously referred to as an
econometric model, an input-output model, or even a computable general equilibrium
model.
http://www.remi.com/



Transportation Research Board Benefit Cost Analysis Website
Serves as a useful resource for developing and conducting benefit-cost analysis for
transportation projects.
http://bca.transportationeconomics.org/



Transportation-version of the Coastal Adaptation to Sea level Rise Tool (T-COAST)
Using economic data, climate projections, and water depth-damage functions
developed by the USACE, T-COAST can present the total economic loss for specific
severe weather event scenarios by economic sector.
http://gis.fhwa.dot.gov/webcast10_coast.asp



USDOT Economic Analysis Primer
Guidance from the Federal Highway Administration Office of Asset Management that is
intended to provide a foundation for understanding the role of economic analysis in
highway decision making. It is oriented toward State and local officials and is
nontechnical in its descriptions of economic methods, while providing a full range of
economic issues that are of potential interest to transportation officials.
http://www.webpages.uidaho.edu/~mlowry/Teaching/EngineeringEconomy/Suppleme
ntal/USDOT_Economic_Analysis_Primer.pdf



USDOT TIGER Methodology
Guidance including recommended methodology for calculating multiple benefits, such
as emissions reductions, operating cost savings, travel time savings, and safety; provides
monetized values for several benefits
https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/Tiger_BenefitCost_Analysis_%28BCA%29_Resource_Guide_1.pdf
https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/TIGER_BCA_Guidance.pdf

Other Guidance


Caltrans Guidance on Incorporating Sea Level Rise
A guide issued by Caltrans in 2001 for use in planning and development of Project
Initiation Documents. The guidance emphasizes the incorporation of SLR into Project
Initiation Documents, which record decisions on scope, cost, and schedule for major
projects on the State Highway System.
http://www.dot.ca.gov/ser/downloads/sealevel/guide_incorp_slr.pdf



MTC (Bay Area) Compilation of 124 adaptation strategies
55

The MTC pilot project developed a guide that lists at least one adaptation strategy to
address each of the vulnerabilities identified by the project team across the functional,
governance, informational, and physical categories. The guide is included in Appendix C
of the MTC (Bay Area) Pilot Report.
http://mtc.ca.gov/planning/climate/


NCHRP Report 750 – Strategic Issues Facing Transportation, Volume 2: Climate Change,
Extreme Weather Events, and the Highway System: Practitioner’s Guide and Research
Report
Report containing a “Practitioner’s Guide” for adaptation, including a framework for
adaptation planning and strategy identification, guidance for collecting and interpreting
climate model projections, possible climate change impacts to the highway system, and
example adaptation strategies.
http://www.trb.org/Main/Blurbs/169781.aspx



New York State DOT Transportation Asset Management Framework
Comprehensive asset management business structure that enables consistent decisionmaking at all levels of the organization and sets consistent fiscal limits for performance
across geographic boundaries. It allows NYSDOT to facilitate the best investment for the
system and the state.
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/asset/plans/ny.pdf

Pilot Project Websites


Caltrans Project Website
Final documents and presentations regarding the pilot project.
http://www.northcoastclimatechange.com



Hillsborough MPO Pilot Page
Final documents and documents from stakeholder meetings.
http://www.planhillsborough.org/hillsborough-transportation-vulnerability-assessmentpilot-project/



Iowa DOT Project Website
Abstract and final project documents.
http://www.northcoastclimatechange.com



MnDOT Pilot Page
Description of the pilot project and project documents.
http://www.dot.state.mn.us/climate/pilotproject.html



MTC – Adapting to Rising Tides: Bay Area Transportation Climate Resilience
56

Final documents and other resources from MTC’s two FHWA Climate Resilience pilot
projects.
http://www.adaptingtorisingtides.org/project/bay-area-transportation-climateresilience-projects/


WSDOT – Climate Change – Adapting and Preparing
Final documents and other resources from WSDOT’s two FHWA Climate Resilience pilot
projects.
http://www.wsdot.wa.gov/SustainableTransportation/adapting.htm

57

