Name1 seemed to be learning towards me when I spoke to suggest they were listening. They talked a lot with an enthusiastic tone, asked questions, and took extensive notes.
Name2 had their hands underneath the table for most of our conversation and did not seem willing to pick up a pen. In order to try to engage them more, I asked them questions about their friends and what they like to do for fun.
Name3 and I didn't talk too much, but they wrote a TON while we sat together. It seemed like they enjoyed having another person there to supervise them, but didn't necessarily need or want to talk about their writing. They wound up finishing their draft while we sat together.
Name4's writing is beautiful. They talked a lot, but not necessarily always about the writing. Our conversations reminded me a bit of Name2 and I tried to make sure I was asking Name4 about their personal life and their feelings toward writing. When I tried to steer the conversation towards writing, though, they talked less and seemed less engaged. They would usually answer with one or two words. When I pointed out something I really liked in a descriptive paragraph, though, they got very excited and began explaining why they wrote such a heavy description. I encouraged them to keep writing and maybe look at some poetry!

I practiced asking more questions. When the student asked me a question, I rephrased their question and asked it back so we could problem solve together.
I realized asking questions about Name2's life helped to open them up more. Sometimes barriers to writing are not necessarily about the writing itself, but about other contexts that make wrting feel impossible or scary. I think I will engage more with students about their personal lives and feelings.
I learned to give students space to write. Sometimes, the best thing I can do is to be there for accountability purposes. I was really proud of Name3. 
I learned to incorporate praise more when working with students. Name4's face lit up when I got authentically excited about their creative writing. 