  CLIMATE READY BOSTON FINAL REPORT
   MAYOR MARTIN J. WALSH
  DECEMBER 2016

     Dear Neighbors,
The challenge of climate change is here, in Boston, now. We’ve seen more frequent flooding on Morrissey Boulevard. We endured the record-setting snowstorms of 2015. And this year we experienced the driest, and one of the hottest, summers in our history.
Climate change has influenced all these events. I’ve felt these changes from my home in Dorchester, and I know you’ve felt them in your neighborhoods, too.
As the century progresses, the effects of climate change will grow. Those changes might seem overwhelming, but Bostonians are practical and creative. We work together to solve problems. And our response to climate change is no exception. Climate change has been a top priority since I entered office. All parts and sectors of the city have expanded their efforts to save energy and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the cause of climate change. Now, because we know that the climate will continue to change for many years, we—with community organizations, academic institutions, and businesses—are accelerating the work of preparing Boston for change that cannot be avoided.
A year ago, with the support of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Green Ribbon Commission, I launched Climate Ready Boston, an initiative to create a systematic and comprehensive framework for the work we must do. With a team that included local climate scientists and experienced engineers, planners, and designers, Climate Ready Boston updated the projections of how much our climate will change, identified where we’re most vulnerable, and proposed steps for becoming more resilient to the changes ahead. I’m pleased to share the results with you.
Our responsibility is to turn these proposals into action. Climate change is not a narrow issue, but one that affects the social and economic vitality of our city. Climate action will not only keep us safer in the face of higher tides, more intense storms, and more extreme heat. It will also create jobs, improve public spaces and public health, and make our energy supply more efficient and resilient. These improvements will provide long-term economic benefits, strengthen our infrastructure, and make our neighborhoods safer. By preparing for the inevitable effects of climate change as part of the Imagine Boston 2030 citywide plan, we’re investing in our future.
Climate change poses a greater threat to some Bostonians. The very young and very old, people who do not speak English, and those with low incomes or medical illnesses or disabilities are all at elevated risk. By ensuring that our solutions are built together with those communities and in response to their needs, climate action will help us build a more equitable city. Furthermore, because climate change knows no borders, we will work with neighboring municipalities to address the regional impacts we face together.
Climate change will continue for decades. Today, we can take steps to make our city healthier and more thriving now and establish a foundation that enables the next generation to build on the work that we are starting. I look forward to working with you in your communities.
Sincerely,
December 2016
         Martin J. Walsh, Mayor
 
   The City of Boston and Green Ribbon Commission would like to thank the following individuals and groups for their contributions to Climate Ready Boston.
    CLIMATE READY BOSTON STEERING COMMITTEE
City of Boston
Austin Blackmon, Carl Spector, Mia Goldwasser
Green Ribbon Commission
John Cleveland, Bud Ris, Amy Longsworth
MA Office of Coastal Zone Management
Lisa Engler, Patricia Bowie
Boston Planning and Development Agency
Gerald Autler
CLIMATE READY BOSTON PROJECT TEAM
City of Boston
Carl Spector, Mia Goldwasser
HR&A Advisors
Jamie Springer, Phillip Kash,
Sara Brown, Jonathan Sandor Goldman
Arcadis
Hugh Roberts, Carly Foster, Kelli Thurston
Sasaki
Jason Hellendrung, Jill Allen Dixon, Theresa O’Neil
University of Massachusetts Boston School for the Environment
Paul Kirshen, Ellen Douglas,
Robyn Hannigan, Rebecca Herst
INFRASTRUCTURE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
City
Boston Housing Authority
Boston Redevelopment Authority
Boston Transportation Department Boston Water and Sewer Commission Boston Public Schools
Boston Conservation Commission
Boston Department of Public Works Boston Inspectional Services Department Boston Landmarks Commission
Boston Office of Emergency Management Boston Parks and Recreation Department City of Cambridge
State and Regional
MA Department of Conservation and Recreation MA Department of Public Utilities
MA Department of Transportation
Metropolitan Area Planning Council Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority Massachusetts Port Authority
Massachusetts Water Resources Authority National Park Service (Harbor Islands)
Utilities
Comcast
Eversource Energy National Grid
Veolia
Verizon Communications
Nonprofit
Medical Academic and Scientific Community Organization A Better City
Partners Health Care
The Trust for Public Land
The Trustees of Reservations
Boston University
Harvard University
Green Ribbon Commission Climate Preparedness Working Group
COMMUNITY ADVISORY GROUP
City
Boston Elderly Commission
Boston Housing Authority
Boston Public Health Commission
Mayor’s Office of Resilience and Racial Equity Mayor’s Office for Immigrant Advancement
Nonprofit
Alternatives for Community and Environment Boston Climate Action Network
Boston Harbor Now
Boston Student Advisory Council
Climate Action Business Association
Codman Square Neighborhood Development Corporation City Life / Vida Urbana
Neighborhood of Affordable Housing
BOSTON RESEARCH ADVISORY GROUP
Sea Level Rise
Robert DeConto, University of Massachusetts Amherst Duncan FitzGerald, Boston University
Carling Hay, Harvard University
Zoe Hughes, Boston University
Andrew Kemp, Tufts University Robert Kopp, Rutgers University
Coastal Storms
Bruce Anderson, Boston University
Zhiming Kuang, Harvard University
Sai Ravela, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Jonathan Woodruff, University of Massachusetts Amherst
Extreme Precipitation
Mathew Barlow, University of Massachusetts Lowell Mathias Collins, NOAA
Art DeGaetano, Cornell University
C. Adam Schlosser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Extreme Temperatures
Auroop Ganguly, Northeastern University Evan Kodra, risQ Company
Matthias Ruth, Northeastern University
The City of Boston would like to thank the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Executive Office
of Energy and Environmental
Affairs and the Barr Foundation and Sherry and Alan Leventhal Family Foundation for the generous funding that made this initiative possible.
      
     CONTENTS
l Recommended Roadmap
     82 Layer 1: Updated Climate Projections 86 Layer 2: Prepared Communities
98 Layer 3: Protected Shores
116 Layer 4: Resilient Infrastructure
130 Layer 5: Adapted Buildings
    150 Charlestown 174 Charles River 194 Dorchester 216 Downtown 240 East Boston
264 Roxbury
282 South Boston
308 South End
330 District-Scale Flood Protection
  
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
H City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate risks are not new for Boston, but they will continue to increase as the global climate changes.
 Executive Summary ix
 
MAYOR MARTIN J. WALSH
 Since 1991, Boston has experienced 21 events that triggered federal or state disaster declarations.
For example, in 2011, Hurricane Irene caused downed trees and power outages across the city. In 2012, while Boston was spared the most devastating effects of Hurricane Sandy due to the storm missing Boston’s high tide by five hours, the city still experienced high winds and coastal flooding. As the climate changes, the likelihood of coastal and riverine flooding—as well as other hazards, like stormwater flooding and extreme heat—will increase.
The challenges from climate change are substantial and complex but can be addressed through bold and creative actions that support the city’s vitality and livability.
Boston can thrive in the coming decades
if it takes action to adapt its people, its neighborhoods, and its economic and cultural assets, starting now. This work will be difficult, contentious, and complex. But if done well, it will not only create a resilient, climate-ready Boston—it will also dramatically improve
the city and quality of life for all its residents.
x City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
  Boston can thrive in the coming decades if it takes action to adapt its people, its neighborhoods, and its economic and cultural assets, starting now.
Image courtesy of Sasaki
Executive Summary xi
 
 To address these challenges,
Climate Ready Boston
features four components.
UPDATED CLIMATE PROJECTIONS
A set of updated projections for four climate factors: extreme temperatures,
sea level rise, extreme precipitation, and
storms. The University
of Massachusetts Boston oversaw a team of climate scientists, the Boston Research Advisory Group, to develop these projections.
CLIMATE FACTORS
◦ Extreme Temperatures
◦ Sea Level Rise (SLR)
◦ Extreme Precipitation ◦ Storms
VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT
A comprehensive evaluation of current
and potential future risks associated with each of three climate hazards (extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding) for Boston’s people, buildings, infrastructure, and economy. Vulnerability assessment data for the three climate hazards reflects the underlying factors studied in the Climate Projection Consensus.
VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT HAZARDS
◦ Extreme Heat
◦ Stormwater Flooding
◦ Coastal and Riverine Flooding
FOCUS AREAS
Eight Boston areas
where the results of the Vulnerability Assessment and the climate resilience initiatives are applied in more detail to illustrate the risks Boston faces and how Boston can address them. The focus areas recognize that some risk, particularly for coastal and riverine flooding,
is spatially concentrated.
ANALYSIS AREAS
◦ Charlestown ◦ Charles River ◦ Dorchester
◦ Downtown
◦ East Boston
◦ Roxbury
◦ South Boston ◦ South End
CLIMATE RESILIENCE INITIATIVES
These policy, planning, programmatic, and financial initiatives address the risks identified in the Vulnerability Assessment and work together
to increase Boston’s resilience. The initiatives are summarized in an Implementation Roadmap that sets forth, for each initiative, responsibility, time frame, and key milestones.
INITIATIVE LAYERS
◦ Updated Climate Projections
◦ Prepared and Connected
Communities
◦ Protected Shores
◦ Resilient Infrastructure
◦ Adapted Buildings
xii City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
  
 Climate Ready Boston
is coordinated with Imagine Boston 2030,
the first citywide plan in 50 years, and 100 Resilient Cities, to guide Boston toward a more affordable, equitable, connected, and resilient future.
Through Imagine Boston 2030,
the City has identified areas that have capacity to accommodate Boston’s growing population and dynamic economy. Many of the areas where Boston will grow will be exposed to increasing flood
risk as sea levels rise. As it grows in these areas, Boston is committing to protecting them. While we do not know all the mechanisms for protection yet, Boston is investing in developing local climate resilience plans for vulnerable areas. These plans will identify multilayered investments needed to enable climate-ready growth.
Boston will approach this topic dynamically and respond to new information as we have it. Climate adaptation presents Boston with opportunities for carefully managed growth and investment that ensure existing neighborhoods can thrive, new neighborhoods are ready
for the changing climate, and jobs are created and expertise developed for long-term growth and protection.
 xiv City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 PLANNING CONTEXT
Boston’s favorable location, with three rivers flowing into a sheltered harbor well-suited for waterborne trade, helped it grow into a major commercial city. The city’s core was once the narrow Shawmut Peninsula, but as trade and population grew to make Boston the economic center of the region, Bostonians filled in the tidal marshes with wharves, parks, and entire neighborhoods built on new land. In the three centuries following Boston’s founding in 1630, the city’s footprint increased by nearly 50 percent, with much of the land along the coastline and riverbanks filled to just above high tide.
Although coastal expansion in previous centuries made the city more vulnerable to climate change, it helped Boston become the largest residential and commercial center in New England. The city is home to over 656,000 residents1 and 718,000 jobs, 2 accounting for a total of $160 billion in annual economic output. Boston is a center for financial
1 Source: “ACS 5-Year Estimates (2011–2014).” U.S. Census Bureau. 2 Source: Boston Planning and Development Agency Analysis.
institutions, higher education, and medical services. It is also the hub of the region’s transportation system, with subway lines, bus service, commuter rail lines, ports, and Logan International Airport.
Boston recognized the threat of climate change early and has pursued an integrated approach to address it. In 2000, Boston launched its climate action program when
it joined the Cities for Climate Protection Campaign of ICLEI-Local Governments for Sustainability. Over the last 15 years, the City has led a range of efforts to reduce emissions citywide to slow the pace and scale
of climate change, including the
2011 commitment for an 80 percent reduction in carbon emissions by 2050. In recognition of these efforts, the
City received an award at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris (COP21). However, even under the most optimistic projections of global emissions reductions, Boston faces serious risk from climate change and must adapt.
LANDMASS IN 1630
2016 SHORELINE
Climate Ready Boston will guide Boston’s adaptation efforts, building upon recommendations from the City’s 2007 Climate Action Plan and its 2011 and 2014 updates. Based on the most up-to-date scientific consensus
of future climate conditions, Climate Ready Boston provides an evaluation of potential impacts from Boston’s three major climate hazards: extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding. Climate Ready Boston then identifies climate resilience initiatives to enable Boston to address these risks and continue
to thrive in the face of climate change.
ABOVE
Boston’s Present & Historical Shoreline
Executive Summary xv

 Boston’s Future Climate
TODAY’S CHOICES
EMISSIONS SCENARIOS
FUTURE IMPACTS
THE MORE GREENHOUSE GASES IN THE ATMOSPHERE:
          Bostonians must first understand the likely impacts of climate change in order to plan for a strong, resilient future.3
To help us understand climate change impacts at the local level, Climate Ready Boston convened a working group of the region’s climate scientists. The Boston Research Advisory Group (BRAG), overseen by the University of Massachusetts Boston School for the Environment, developed this consensus about how Boston’s climate will change over the course of the twenty-first century.
The longer-term impacts of climate change are largely dependent on the global community’s success at curbing emissions of greenhouse gases. Because we do not know how well we will do, scientists use multiple emissions scenarios as the bases for their projections. Climate projections for
3 This section is a summary of the BRAG Climate Projection Consensus report, which describes future climate conditions in the Boston region, including extreme temperatures, sea level rise, heavy precipitation, and coastal storms. The full report is available at climateready.boston.gov/findings.
the next few decades are relatively consistent, regardless of which emissions scenario they rely on. However, the projections become increasingly different the further we look into the future.
Climate Ready Boston’s climate projections use three emissions scenarios from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change:
◦ A HIGH-EMISSIONS SCENARIO often characterized as a continuation of business as usual;
◦ A MEDIUM-EMISSIONS SCENARIO in which emissions remain around their current levels through 2050 and then are slowly reduced
in the second half of the century through moderate emissions reductions and;
◦ A LOW-EMISSIONS SCENARIO in which net global emissions are reduced to less than a third of their current levels by 2050 and are brought to zero by about 2080 through major emissions reductions.
These findings emphasize that a critical strategy for climate adaptation is the expansion of efforts to reduce our carbon emissions.
xvi City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xvii
 
EXTREME TEMPERATURES
Average temperatures in the Northeast have been slowly rising for over a century. Temperatures in the northeastern United States increased by almost two degrees Fahrenheit between 1895 and 2011.
The rate of increase in average temperatures
is accelerating, and Boston’s average summer temperatures and number of days with extreme heat will increase. Heat waves will become
more common, last longer, and be hotter. While the average summer temperature in Boston from 1981 to 2010 was 69 degrees, it may be as high
as 76 degrees by 2050 and 84 degrees by 2100. In other words, by 2050 Boston’s summers may be
as hot as Washington, DC’s, summers are today, and by the end of the century, they may be hotter than Birmingham, AL are today. Compared to the period from 1971 to 2000, when there were 11 days per year over 90 degrees, there may be as many
as 40 by 2030 and 90 by 2070—nearly the entire summer. Heat waves—extended periods of extreme heat—are a leading cause of weather- related mortality in the United States.
Although winters will be warmer, the risk of frost and freeze damage and cold snaps will continue. While from 1981 to 2010, Boston reached below freezing almost one out of three days per year, by the end of the century, this may happen only around one in ten days.
As an urban area, Boston tends to be hotter
than surrounding communities that are more suburban or rural. Urban areas generally tend to be hotter than nearby rural areas because concrete,
steel, and other building materials retain more heat than vegetation. This phenomenon, known as the “urban heat island effect,” is compounded by climate change.
Future temperatures in Boston will depend on how much we are able to cut our greenhouse gas emissions. The rise in temperatures between now and 2030 is largely consistent between all emission scenarios. However, the scenarios show that cutting emissions now can greatly slow the rise in temperatures in the second half of the century.
SEA LEVEL RISE
The pace of relative sea level rise is accelerating.
Over the entire twentieth century, sea levels rose about nine inches relative to land. Another eight inches of relative sea level rise may happen by 2030, almost three times faster. By 2050, sea levels may be as much as 1.5 feet higher than they were in 2000, and by 2070, they may be as much as 3 feet higher than in 2000. This is driven by a combination of
the melting of land ice, the expansion of water as it warms, and changes in the amounts of water extracted from below ground or stored behind dams.
A major reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions can have a tremendous impact on the future of Boston Harbor. While sea level rise projections for 2030 are about the same across
all emission scenarios, in later years there are
big differences between scenarios. With a sharp reduction in global emissions, end-of-century
sea level rise could stay under two feet, but a continuation of business as usual may result in over seven feet of sea level rise.
THE NUMBER OF VERY HOT DAYS WILL INCREASE
    SEA LEVELS IN BOSTON WILL CONTINUE TO RISE
 xviii City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xix
Data Source: BRAG Report, 2016

  Image courtesy of Sasaki
 Rising sea levels mean that any given storm will cause more flooding in the future than it would today.
xx City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 RAINFALL FROM STORMS WILL INCREASE
     EXTREME PRECIPITATION
In the Northeast, there has already been a very large increase in the intensity of extreme rain and snow. From 1958 to 2010, there was a 70 percent increase in the amount of precipitation that fell
on the days with the heaviest precipitation. This increase is greater in the Northeast than for any other region of the country.
The increase in extreme precipitation is expected to continue. As the climate warms, more ocean water evaporates into the air, and warmer air can hold more water, supporting heavier precipitation events. Heavy precipitation events will continue to increase in Boston. However, due to the complexity of the processes underlying precipitation as well as natural variability, the magnitude of this increase is not yet clear.
If we take action to cut global greenhouse gas emissions, we can prevent the most extreme precipitation projections from becoming a reality. A commonly used measure of major
rain and snow events is the “10-year, 24-hour storm,” or the amount of precipitation that has at most a one-in-ten annual chance of falling during a 24-hour period. While projections for these events are similar in the short term across different emissions scenarios, by the end of the century, the difference between medium and high scenarios is about 10 percent.
STORMS
Current climate projections do not provide a clear projection of how the intensity, frequency, and trajectory (tracks) of tropical and extratropical storms will change. Extratropical storms (like blizzards and nor’easters) have cold air at their centers. Tropical storms, on the other hand, have warm air, which means that they can develop
into hurricanes more quickly. There are large uncertainties about how climate change will affect future storms. This is particularly true for extratropical storms. For tropical storms, there
is some evidence that their intensity has been increasing. If tropical storm intensity increases, there could be more frequent major hurricanes (Category 3 and greater), even if the total number of tropical storms does not increase.
Rising sea levels mean that any given storm will cause more flooding in the future than it would today. During a storm, winds can blow ocean water towards the land, creating a “storm surge” on top of the baseline sea level. When storm surge is combined with tidal processes, the result is known as a “storm tide.” With higher seas, it takes less precipitation and a less powerful storm surge to produce the same amount of flooding as a more powerful storm would produce when the seas
are lower.
Executive Summary xxi

 Boston’s Increasing Climate Vulnerability
THE NUMBER OF HEAT-RELATED DEATHS EACH YEAR IN BOSTON WILL TRIPLE
   The Vulnerability Assessment analyzes how Boston’s people, buildings, infrastructure, and economy will be affected by climate hazards.
In considering the impacts on people, the assessment focuses on socially vulnerable populations, people who are more vulnerable to climate hazards because they already experience stressors, such as poverty, poor health, and limited English proficiency. For property, the assessment considers direct and indirect impacts,
in terms of both structural damage to buildings and site-access challenges.
For infrastructure, it analyzes expected impacts on Boston’s transportation, power, water and sewer, emergency response, and environmental systems. Finally, it evaluates the potential economic impacts of flooding, such as the loss of jobs and disruption of business operations.
EXTREME HEAT IMPACTS
With climate change, Boston will experience both increasing average temperatures and increasing frequency, duration, and intensity of heat waves. While temperatures are hottest in areas of the city that experience localized urban heat island effects, on very hot days, the entire city is at risk for the negative impacts of extreme heat.
Extreme heat can cause negative health impacts, including direct loss of life, increases in respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, and challenges to mental health. In the baseline period (1985 to 2016), the heat-related mortality rate was about 2.9 per 100,000 people in Boston. During the 2020s, this rate is expected to more than double. By the 2080s, this rate may more than triple to 10.5 per 100,000 people under a moderate emissions reduction scenario or reach as high
as 19.3 per 100,000 under the business-as-usual
emissions scenario. Climate change can also harm air quality, leading to increasing risks for diseases such as asthma. Health impacts will be especially significant for populations such as older adults, children, and the medically ill.
Heat can have negative consequences for Boston’s infrastructure, presenting further challenges
for health and quality of life. Power failures are more likely during heat waves due to the increased demand for electric power for air conditioning, as well as the added stress of the heat on mechanical and electrical assets. High temperatures can also cause thermal expansion in roads and railroad tracks, leading to damage or requiring speed reductions. As rising temperatures lead to a potential increase in tree mortality, any loss of canopy coverage or green space will only contribute to the urban heat island effect, reduced air quality, increased stormwater runoff, and decreased quality of life.
xxii City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xxiii
Image courtesy of Sasaki
 
   STORMWATER FLOODING IMPACTS
Stormwater flooding occurs throughout Boston today, as the city’s drainage system struggles to manage intense rain events, rising sea levels, and less permeable ground surface that would slow and absorb stormwater. Common areas for stormwater flooding are along the coast, where outfalls may be unable to discharge; transportation corridors with impervious surfaces where water cannot percolate; and designed drainage areas whose capacities are exceeded. The drainage system requires ongoing investments to catch up and keep up with climate conditions.
In the near term (2030s–2050s), rising sea levels and increasing extreme precipitation will exacerbate stormwater flooding, unless the drainage system is upgraded. Higher sea levels mean that stormwater outfalls may not be able to discharge or may even backflow, and more extreme precipitation means that drains and pipes must handle greater volumes of water in short periods of time.
The area of Boston exposed to stormwater flooding is projected to grow steadily throughout the century. As soon as the 2050s, 7 percent of the total land area in the city could be exposed to frequent stormwater flooding from 10-year, 24-hour rain events.
Transportation infrastructure will be impacted by frequent stormwater flooding at multiple scales ranging from sidewalks to local streets to major thoroughfares like highways and MBTA lines. Frequent stormwater flooding is projected near major thoroughfares such as Columbus Avenue, Tremont Street, and Morrissey Boulevard, as well as Interstates 90 and 93 and along the MBTA Orange and Red Lines. Additionally, many of these transportation routes are also designated evacuation routes, which may become increasingly more flood prone to coastal storms with heavy rainfall.
BUILDINGS EXPOSED TO FREQUENT STORMWATER FLOODING
   Near term Mid term Late term (2030s–2050s) (2050s-2100s) (2070s onwards)
 LAND AREA EXPOSED TO FREQUENT STORMWATER FLOODING
  Near term Mid term Late term (2030s–2050s) (2050s-2100s) (2070s onwards)
 BUILDINGS EXPOSED TO FREQUENT STORMWATER FLOODING TYPE (2070S-2100S)
  Without improvements to the stormwater system, over 11,000 structures and 85,000 people will be directly exposed to frequent stormwater flooding as soon as the 2070s.4
4 Current building stock and population in areas expected to be exposed. The building stock and population have not been projected.
xxiv City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
STORMWATER FLOODING FROM 10-YEAR, 24-HOUR STORM WITH VARYING CLIMATE CONDITIONS
RESIDENTIAL
MIXED-USE
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
INDUSTRIAL
COMMERCIAL
OTHER*
*Education, General Government, Cultural/ Religious, Parking & Storage, Agriculture, Food Supply, Recreation, Telecom, Transport, & Utilities
Near term (2030s-2050s) M M i i d d t t e e r r m m ( ( 2 2 0 0 5 5 0 0 s s - - 2 21 1 0 0 0 0 s s ) ) Late term (2070s onwards) Major Roads
 Executive Summary xxv

COASTAL & RIVERINE FLOODING IMPACTS
NEAR TERM (2030s–2050s)
FLOOD PROGRESSION
In the near term (2030s–2050s), coastal and riverine flood exposure will be concentrated in South Boston, East Boston, Charlestown, and Downtown and represents a significant threat to these neighborhoods and the rest of the city. Across the city, a severe flood with a
1 percent annual chance of occurring would inundate 2,100 buildings, representing $20 billion in real estate value, and including the homes of 16,000 Bostonians. Such an event would cause an estimated $2.3 billion
in physical damages to buildings and property and other economic losses, including relocation and lost productivity. Considering the impact of flood events of multiple probabilities, 70 percent of economic losses are concentrated in Downtown and South Boston, with their high densities of businesses and valuable properties.
    What Is a “1 Percent Annual Chance Flood”?
A “1 percent annual chance flood” is a flood event that has a 1 in 100 chance of occurring in any given year. Another name for this flood is the “100-year flood.” Experts prefer not to use
the “100-year” term since it gives the impression that a certain level of flooding will only occur once every 100 years. In fact, it has
a one percent chance
of occurring in any given year and can even occur multiple times in a single year or decade.
Over a 30-year period, there is almost a one in three chance that a 1 percent annual chance flood will occur at least once.
    MID TERM (2050s–2100s)
FLOOD PROGRESSION
In the second half of the century (2050s–2100s), coastal and riverine flood exposure may increase across waterfront neighborhoods and start to be significant in Dorchester. As sea levels rise, the depths of flooding along the waterfront will increase, and floodwaters will start to threaten higher grounds and areas further inland that currently face little or no flood risk.
 xxvi City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xxvii

   LATER TERM (2070s ONWARDS)
FLOOD PROGRESSION
In the late century (2070s or later), a significant
portion of Boston’s current land may be inundated
every month. Exposure to severe coastal and
riverine flooding will expand to vast areas of the city, including inland neighborhoods like the South End and neighborhoods along the Charles River. By penetrating past low-lying areas around Fort Point Channel and by the New Charles River Dam, floodwaters from storms
can reach these areas that are not currently exposed to significant coastal and riverine flooding. Compared to the near term (2030s–2050s), over three times the amount of land—almost one-fifth of Boston’s land area—will
be exposed to inundation from a lower probability (1 percent annual chance) event. Five percent of Boston’s total land area will be inundated at high tide at least once a month, even without any storm conditions.
Climate Ready Boston selected sea level rise scenarios (9 inch, 21 inch, and 36 inch) that
are likely to occur within the century to focus
the discussion on how Boston will adapt to climate change. The actual sea level rise Boston experiences will be driven by many factors, including global carbon emissions. Climate models show that sea level rise in the near and intermediate term is largely locked in due to emissions that have already been released into the atmosphere. In the first half of the century (2030s–2050s), nine inches of sea level rise are expected even if there is a major reduction in emissions. Twenty-one inches or more of sea level rise are expected in the second half of the century (2050s–2100) regardless of the level of emissions.
The highest sea level rise considered in this report,
36 inches, is highly probable toward the end of the century if emissions remain at the current level or even if there is a moderate reduction in emissions.
If there is a major emissions reduction, the
chance of 36 inches or more of sea level rise by
the end of the century is still just slightly less
than 50 percent. If emissions remain at current levels, there is an approximately 15 percent chance that sea levels will rise at least 7.4 feet by the end of century, a scenario far more dire than those considered here. Any adaptation to even the lower end of projections for sea level rise will require significant long-term effort, and the city must therefore start adapting now.
    Neighborhoods
Total Land Area (Acres)
21” SLR
1% annual chance
36% 31% 30% 28% 48%
2%
1% <1% 11% 3%
36” SLR
1% annual chance
54% 45% 49% 32% 63%
7% 17% 5% 20% 71%
36” SLR
AMHT
12% 10% 14% 24% 19%
1% <1% <1% 6% <1%
I. Greatest Exposure & increasing throughout century
9” SLR
1% annual chance
21” SLR
1% annual chance
36” SLR
1% annual chance
460
350 1,680 260 1,220
240 80 130 750 450
36” SLR
AMHT
110 70 480 200 360
20 <10 <10 220 <10
9” SLR
1% annual chance
14% 14% 16% 25% 24%
1% <1% <1% 6% <1%
<1% 0 0
8% 10% 18% 8%
LAND AREA EXPOSED (ACRES)
PERCENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD EXPOSED
 Charlestown 870 Downtown 770
120 310 110 240 540 1,040 200 230 470 930
East Boston Harbor Islands South Boston
3,340 820 1,940
II. Lower Exposure today, but significant jump late century
 Allston / Brighton
Back Bay / Beacon Hill Roxbury
Dorchester
South End
III. Other Neighborhoods
Fenway / Kenmore Hyde Park Jamaica Plain Mattapan Roslindale
West Roxbury
Boston Total
2,940 460 2,770 3,780 640
620 3,260 2,260 1,560 2,250 3,350
31,720
30 <10 <10 240 <10
<10 0 0
70 <10 <10 430 20
 xxviii City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xxix
<10 0 0 0000 0000 0000
<1% 0 0 0000 0000 0000
<10 0 0
<10 0 0
<1% 0 0
<1% 0 0
1,720 3,280 5,630 1,470
AMHT is the Average monthly highest tide

  India Wharf view from the Harbor Walk — High Tide during October
Image courtesy of Sasaki
 As the sea level continues to rise, the likelihood of major floods will increase from a 1% annual chance to a monthly reality.
xxx City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
  As sea levels continue to rise, severely damaging floods will shift from a rare occurrence to a monthly reality. In the near term, a flood event inundating 5 percent of the city will have a 1 percent chance of occurring in any given year. By mid- century, such a flood will become ten times more likely, and by the late century, that magnitude of flooding will occur at least once a month. This means that between 10 and 20 percent of Charlestown, East Boston, Downtown, and South Boston will face high- tide flooding, even when there is no storm.
As climate change progresses over the course of this century, ever greater areas of Boston will be exposed to more frequent and more severe flooding.
◦ In the late century (2070s or later), 75 percent of buildings that will be exposed are either residential or mixed-use, exposing over 88,000 people (nearly 15 percent of Boston’s population) to coastal and riverine flooding.
◦ More than 10 percent of Boston’s existing buildings will be exposed to late-century coastal and riverine flooding.
◦ Toward the end of the century, 5 percent
of Boston’s real estate market value can be expected to suffer flood exposure to high tides, increasing to 25 percent for less frequent but more severe events.
Executive Summary xxxi

Annualized losses will increase with sea level rise...
CITY OF BOSTON ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
     CITYWIDE POPULATION EXPOSED
Severely damaging flood events will become more common over time. As flood risk increases this century and beyond, not only do the total expected annualized losses increase dramatically, but the share of these losses attributable to high- probability floods (10 percent chance of occurring in any given year) also becomes much greater.
Coastal and riverine flooding can impact the local and regional economy through physical damages, stress factors (mental stress and anxiety and lost productivity), displacement costs, and losses
due to business interruption. Loss estimations presented in this assessment are reported as an annualized value for each sea level rise condition; annualized values represent the total of the product of single losses expected for each projected sea level rise condition and the chance of occurring in any given year.
Coastal and riverine flooding can disrupt the Critical infrastructural systems—including transportation, energy, communication, and essential facilities—on which Bostonians rely. Over time, an increasing number of these systems will be exposed to flooding.
◦ Key components of Boston’s transportation system, most notably MBTA T service and major roads, may be at risk to coastal and riverine flood impacts in the near future.
◦ There are 240 essential and public facilities in the area exposed to late-century coastal and riverine flooding for lower probability storms.
Although the Vulnerability Assessment chapter of this report contains a discussion of the vulnerabilities of multiple infrastructural systems, further study is necessary, especially for energy and telecommunications systems.
The evacuation routes vulnerable to flooding include:
◦ I-93
◦ McClellan Highway Callahan Tunnel
◦ I-90 Ted Williams Tunnel
◦ Morrisey Boulevard
◦ Storrow Drive
◦ Tremont Street
 Percentages are based on current population.
xxxii City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xxxiii

 Increasing Boston’s Climate Readiness
Guided by the Vulnerability Assessment findings, which identified and quantified the impacts of future climate change, the City should undertake a set of climate resilience initiatives to address Boston’s climate risks.
These initiatives will increase Boston’s ability to thrive in the face of intensifying climate hazards, leading to improved quality of life for all residents, especially the most vulnerable, and creating stronger neighborhoods and a healthier environment.
The climate resilience initiatives build on a broad set of efforts undertaken to date by the City and its partners to prepare Boston for climate change.
To develop the initiatives, Climate Ready Boston reviewed past climate adaptation plans, conducted interviews and focus groups with a broad range of local stakeholders, and examined best practices from other cities across the world that are contending with climate change impacts.
xxxiv City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
CLIMATE RESILIENCE PRINCIPLES
The City drew on five principles for successful resilience to climate change based on lessons from other cities. These principles include the following:
1. Generate multiple benefits. Effective climate resilience initiatives both reduce risks from climate hazards and create other benefits. Resilience initiatives that produce multiple benefits generate more resources to support their implementation and sustainability.
Flood barriers that also provide recreational open space, developable land, or upgraded roadways represent examples of multiple- benefit solutions. Nonphysical interventions also can offer multiple benefits, as evidenced by programs that help businesses and households make operational changes to reduce their
flood risk while also lowering utility costs or reducing insurance premiums. Multiple-benefit approaches enable Boston to address some
of the other pressing challenges that it faces beyond just climate risks.
2. Incorporate local involvement in design
and decision making. Effective resilience initiatives require on-the-ground knowledge and sustained community support for implementation and long-term operations and maintenance. Local stakeholders can help illuminate critical resilience opportunities in their communities and generate creative ideas for solving multiple challenges at once.
3. Create layers of protection by working at multiple scales. Layers that are independently effective can also work together to provide mutual support and reduce the risk of a catastrophic failure associated with a single line of defense. For example, to address extreme heat, adding green infrastructure (e.g., increasing tree canopy) in combination with building-scale adaptations (e.g., using cool roofing and paving materials or increasing energy efficiency) is more effective than
doing either independently. Shading from the tree canopy reduces the cooling load on the building, and the retrofitted building radiates less heat, with a failure to either layer having less impact because of the other.
4. Design in flexibility and adaptability. Climate conditions will continue to change over time, and resilience initiatives must be designed to adapt to them. For example, the 24-hour rainfall for a ten-year storm is projected to increase through the century. To be effective, the stormwater system must be flexible enough to adapt to this increase in extreme precipitation. In practice, this often means decentralized, distributed stormwater storage across cities that can be expanded without disrupting the gray stormwater system. Similarly, the elevation of 1 percent annual chance floods is also projected to increase throughout the century. Buildings can be built today with high ground-floor ceilings so that the ground floor can be filled in as sea levels rise over time.
5. Leverage building cycles. Buildings and infrastructure experience a natural cycle of rehabilitation and replacement over time. Taking adaptation actions within the context
of the natural building cycle can reduce disruption and cost, as in the case of adding green infrastructure to roads as they are being rebuilt, rather than pulling them up just to install green infrastructure. While the natural building cycle progresses, operational changes, as opposed to physical adaptations, can be made to reduce risks. For example, retailers can move the inventory stored in the basement of their stores onto shelves to reduce flood damage in the near term, before local flood defenses are built. The development of new housing and job centers along the waterfront or in other flood- exposed areas presents opportunities to not only construct individual buildings prepared for flood risk but to also raise funds for the construction of area-wide flood defenses.
 Addressing the Specific Characteristics of Each Climate Hazard
The resilience initiatives
are designed to respond
to the geographic scale, frequency, intensity, and projected growth of each climate hazard. For extreme heat, this calls for resilience initiatives that can be applied throughout the
city, prioritize vulnerable populations, and address gaps in the capacity of buildings to cool themselves. The resilience initiatives addressing stormwater flooding are intended to be applied in affected pockets in each neighborhood
and emphasize the ability to keep up with increased precipitation over time. Coastal and riverine flooding calls for a very different approach. The resilience initiatives are intended to be targeted to the areas directly exposed and involve the creation of significant new infrastructure systems in addition to the adaptation of existing systems and buildings.
Executive Summary xxxv
 
LAYERS, STRATEGIES, AND INITIATIVES
The climate resilience initiatives have been organized into four layers and eleven strategies. The layers represent an approach to building resilience at different scales: the community, the shoreline, infrastructure assets, and buildings. The layers are designed to support and reinforce each other.
       xxxvi City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xxxvii
UPDATED CLIMATE PROJECTIONS
Ensure that decision making in Boston is informed by the latest Boston-specific climate projections.
PREPARED AND CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
Support educated, connected communities in pursuing operational preparedness, adaptation planning, and emergency response.
PROTECTED SHORES
Reduce Boston’s risk
of coastal and riverine flooding through both nature-based and hard- engineered flood defenses.
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
Prepare the infrastructure systems that support life in Boston for future climate conditions and create new resilient systems.
ADAPTED BUILDINGS
Create a regulatory environment and financial and other tools to promote new and existing buildings that are climate ready.

 Strategy 1.
Maintain up-to-
date projections
of future climate
conditions to
inform adaptation.
WHY Knowledge is the foundation for action. As global energy use and greenhouse gas emissions become clearer and as more data on the response of the Earth becomes available, climate projections will change. Bostonians need to remain informed to plan for the future.
WHAT The City should establish a Greater Boston Panel on Climate to update climate projections every five years. These projections should inform plans, policies, and regulations and be translated into readily accessible reports and maps.
Strategy 2.
Expand education and engagement of Bostonians on climate hazards and action.
WHY Climate adaptation cannot occur without an informed, engaged, and active public. Community members can provide deeper insight into how climate change is affecting their neighborhoods and businesses and create innovative and sensitive responses.
WHAT The City should work with partners from all sectors to inform and engage the Boston community on the risks from climate change and actions to reduce those risks. Different campaigns—targeting the general public, building owners, community facilities, businesses, and vulnerable populations who are more susceptible to the impacts of climate change—should promote short-term actions to reduce current risks while building support for larger-scale and longer-term measures.
Strategy 3.
Leverage climate adaptation as a tool for economic development.
WHY Over the coming decades, climate adaptation will require significant investments in
the city’s infrastructure, buildings, and other areas. The community can leverage this activity to promote equitable economic development, leaving Bostonians better prepared to thrive and face climate and other challenges.
WHAT The City should help train workers for jobs that will arise from climate adaptation projects and ensure that these projects follow the City’s guidelines for local hiring, living wages, and employment of minority- and women-owned businesses
Strategy 4.
Develop local
climate resilience
plans to coordinate
adaptation efforts.
WHY Some effects of climate change, such as increased temperatures, are spread across the city. Other, particularly coastal and riverine flooding, are more localized. Everywhere, these
risks will interact with each other and with the social and economic needs of the neighborhood in particular ways. Coordinated adaptation actions can advance multiple community priorities simultaneously and use resources more effectively.
WHAT The City should develop local plans to address climate adaptation along with other community priorities. Through in-depth community engagement, the plans should include district-scale flood protection, infrastructure adaptation,
and land-use planning, all in coordination with Imagine Boston 2030, 100 Resilient Cities, GoBoston 2030, and other planning efforts.
Strategy 5.
Create a coastal protection system to address flood risk.
WHY Coastal and riverine flooding poses a major
and increasing threat to communities along Boston’s waterfront and to the vitality of the city itself.
WHAT The City and its regional partners should investigate major “gray” and “green” infrastructure investments
to address flood risk. The
City should ensure that development in flood-prone areas does not prevent the future implementation of flood protection. The flood protection system should incorporate building-scale, district-scale, and harbor-wide measures.
Strategy 6.
Coordinate
investments to
adapt infrastructure
to future climate
conditions.
WHY Boston’s infrastructure
for power, water, transportation, communication, and more is a complex network with many public and private owners, operators, and regulatory authorities. As climate change presents new risks of failure,
all stakeholders need to better understand the totality of vulnerabilities and to coordinate action to address them.
WHAT The City should establish an Infrastructure Coordination Committee with the region’s major infrastructure organizations.
The committee would develop planning and design standards aligned with up-to-date climate projections, identify cascading vulnerabilities, establish coordination mechanisms, and align adaptation efforts with other planning priorities.
xxxviii City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xxxix
      
 Strategy 7.
Develop district-
level energy
solutions
to increase
decentralization
and redundancy.
WHY Decentralized infrastructure of many kinds has the potential to combine climate adaptation with greenhouse gas reduction
and economic development. Local sources that can keep operating during wider power failures could maintain the community’s capacity to keep safe and cool as the frequency and intensity of heat waves rise.
WHAT The City should pursue community energy solutions, such as district energy systems or microgrids, that increase energy reliability and decrease greenhouse gas emissions. Priority sites should include areas with clusters of affordable housing or critical facilities.
Strategy 8.
Expand the
use of green infrastructure
and other natural systems to manage stormwater, mitigate heat, and provide additional benefits.
WHY Climate change will make it more difficult to manage stormwater and keep Bostonians cool, dry, and healthy. Green infrastructure, which relies on natural processes, can address these challenges and improve the safety and beauty of the public realm.
WHAT Building on past investments, the City should increase expand green infrastructure on public and private lands, in particular by developing sustainable funding sources and maintenance programs.
Strategy 9.
Update zoning and building regulations to support climate readiness.
WHY The current regulations that govern development in Boston do not have specific requirements for preparing for future climate conditions. In some cases, they may even pose obstacles to doing so.
WHAT Building on current requirements, the Boston Planning and Development Agency should propose land- use and other regulations that ensure that new development is ready for future climate conditions. The City should advocate for changes to the Massachusetts Building Code and explore measures that increase climate-ready retrofits in existing buildings.
Strategy 10.
Retrofit existing buildings against climate hazards.
WHY Most of the buildings in Boston that need to be prepared for climate change this century are already standing. The adaptation of existing buildings can be technically, operationally, and financially difficult. Property owners, particularly those
with smaller or less valuable properties, may require technical or financial assistance.
WHAT The City should create programs to prepare existing buildings for climate change. Priorities should include buildings facing near-term flood risk and those with a public purpose or vulnerable populations. Programs could include resilience audits, investments in municipal facilities, support for backup power at facilities for vulnerable populations, and a toolkit of financing strategies.
Strategy 11.
Insure buildings against flood damage.
WHY Whatever actions the community takes, natural disasters may still occur. Flood insurance is an indispensable tool for supporting recovery after a flood. Affordable
access to appropriate levels of flood insurance coverage is critical to protecting property owners’ investments and neighborhoods’ stability.
WHAT The City should promote appropriate flood insurance for property owners. This should include joining the National Flood Insurance Community Rating System to obtain
flood insurance discounts through advanced floodplain management and advocating for reforms to better align premiums with actual risk.
xl City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xli
           
   ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE
PROTECTED SHORES
PREPARED AND CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
ADAPTED BUILDINGS
          Climate-ready Zoning
Adaption as a Tool for Economic Development
  Solar Panels & District Microgrids
  Education/ Engagement Initiative
 District Scale Flood Protection
  Elevated Mechanical Systems
  Small Business Preparedness Program
Temporary Flood Barrier
 Resilient Building Design
  xlii City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xliii
Elevated First Floor
Expanded and Maintained Urban Tree Canopy
Potential Harbor Barrier
Protective & Floodable Waterfront Park
  Green Infrastructure Bioswale

 Implementation
Climate Ready Boston’s proposals are diverse in scope and scale. They are short
term and long term, citywide and neighborhood specific, municipal and regional, regulatory and financial.
Some actions can be undertaken simultaneously; others must proceed in a certain order. They cannot all be done at once, because they would overwhelm government and community capacity. Furthermore, they do not need to be done all at once. Because climate change will accumulate over time, Boston’s response, if thought through carefully, can proceed over time too.
The Recommended Roadmap presents a timeline and designated lead agency for undertaking these initiatives. The timeline has three divisions— within two years, within five years, and long- term—plus an arrow indicating if an initiative
is ongoing. Over half of the initiatives will be ongoing because, once started, they will need to continue or repeat indefinitely; for example, climate projections should be updated with new data that becomes available over time.
The time divisions represent a rough prioritization based on many factors, including the following:
◦ Who and what are most at risk now?
◦ Are there existing efforts—climate related or related to other initiatives—upon which the next phase of climate initiatives can build?
◦ Are resources—human, technical, fiscal— available to undertake this work?
◦ Is one initiative a necessary or desirable foundation for another?
◦ What is the risk or cost of delay, and who bears that risk or cost?
◦ Who has to take action?
◦ Is there already community or sectoral
support?
◦ How difficult is implementation?
One question underlying almost all of the initiatives is how to pay for them. Some initiatives explicitly address the financial question, but even those that do not address this question will be affected by it.
Some of the key initiatives that need to be started in the next two years include the following:
◦ Initiative 2-1. Expand citywide climate readiness education and engagement campaign
◦ Initiative 4-1. Develop local climate resilience plans to support district-scale climate adaptation (for the first selected districts)
◦ Initiative 5-2. Determine a consistent evaluation framework for flood defense prioritization
◦ Initiative 6-1. Establish an Infrastructure Coordination Committee
◦ Initiative 8-2. Develop a sustainable operating model for green infrastructure on public land and right-of-way
◦ Initiative 9-2. Revise zoning code to support climate-ready buildings
◦ Initiative 10-2. Prepare municipal buildings for climate change
  xliv City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Executive Summary xlv
Image courtesy of Southie Trees
 
   Focusing on Neighborhoods
To guide adaptation planning across Boston’s neighborhoods, especially when climate vulnerabilities are spatially concentrated, Climate Ready Boston examined several areas in more detail:
North Charlestown
Downtown Waterfront
Orient Heights
Wood Island
Porzio Park
   ◦ Focus Area Vulnerability Assessments provide deeper insight into the types of vulnerabilities that the people, buildings, infrastructure, and economy face in specific areas.
◦ Focus Area Resilience Initiatives show how the citywide resilience initiatives can be applied to specific areas within Boston.
◦ Charlestown
◦ Charles River
◦ Dorchester
◦ Downtown
◦ East Boston
◦ Roxbury
◦ South Boston
◦ South End
Seven out of the eight focus areas contain coastal neighborhoods that face significant risks from coastal and riverine flooding. Where multiple neighborhoods are exposed to flooding from the same source in the same time period, they are grouped together as a single focus area (e.g., all of the Charles River neighborhoods face flood exposure when the Charles River Dam is flanked or overtopped).
The eighth focus area, Roxbury, was developed to serve as an illustrative example of multiple vulnerabilities, based on the intersection of all three climate hazards—coastal and riverine flooding, stormwater flooding, and extreme heat—and demonstrate the application of resilience initiatives focused on these risks.
36 INCHES SLR (2070S OR LATER)
DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD
Based on the citywide vulnerability assessment and the focus-area analyses, Climate Ready Boston proposes nine locations for flood- protection interventions. As sea level rises over the century, the number
of interventions needed increases, and their cumulative effectiveness becomes more important.
HEAT & STORMWATER AND COASTAL FLOODING COASTAL HAZARD FOCUS AREAS Executive Summary xlvii
  xlvi City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
CLIMATE READY BOSTON FOCUS AREAS
New Charles River Dam
Jeffries Point to Central Square
 South Boston Waterfront
  Dorchester Bay
  
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
 xlviii City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
These bold and creative actions
 will support the city’s vitality and livability.
 Executive Summary xlix
 
 CLIMATE READY BOSTON
INITIATIVE WITH DEADLINE CONTINUOUS INITIATIVE
RECOMMENDED ROADMAP
Climate Projection Consensus
STRATEGY 1–
Maintain up-to-date projections of future climate conditions to inform adaptation.
Prepared and Connected Communities
STRATEGY 2–
Expand education and engagement of Bostonians about climate hazards.
Prepared and Connected Communities
STRATEGY 3
Leverage climate adaptation as a tool for economic development.
# INITIATIVE
Launch the Greater Boston Panel on Climate Change
1.1 and require periodic updating of Boston-specific climate
projections.
Create updated local flood
1.2 maps to support planning, policy, and regulation.
Expand Citywide Climate 2.1 Readiness Education and
Engagement campaign. Launch a Climate
2.2 Ready Buildings Education Program for property
owners and users.
Conduct an outreach campaign to facilities that
2.3 serve vulnerable populations to support preparedness
and adaptation.
2.4 Update the City’s heat emergency action plan.
Expand Boston’s Small Business Preparedness Program.
WITHIN 2 YEARS
City establishes policy on planning flood standards.
WITHIN 5 YEARS
Greater Boston Panel on Climate is launched.
Future flood maps are incorporated into City policy and regulation.
LONG-TERM
Climate projections updated every 5 yrs.
Flood maps are periodically updated.
# INITIATIVE
Identify resilience 3.1 focused workforce
development pathways. Pursue inclusive hiring
3.2 and living wages for resilience projects.
Prioritize use of minority-and 3.3 women-owned businesses
for resilience projects.
Develop local climate resilience plans in
4.1 vulnerable areas to support district-scale
climate adaptation.
Establish local climate
resilience committees 4.2 to serve as long-term
community partners for climate adaptation.
WITHIN 2 YEARS
WITHIN 5 YEARS
Pathways are developed and incorporated into existing workforce programs.
LONG-TERM
2.5
Outreach campaign is launched.
Climate adaptation is incorporated into Main Streets program.
Citywide campaign is launched.
Climate Ready Buildings Education Program is launched.
Heat emergency action plan
is updated.
Small business preparedness resources developed.
Initial plans are launched.
First committee is established.
Complete initial plans.
Plans are completed for all focus areas and periodically revised.
Committees are established for all focus areas.
Protected Shores
STRATEGY 4
Develop local climate resilience plans to coordinate adaptation efforts.
IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD
IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD
12 l City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Executive Summary li

 Protected Shores
STRATEGY 5– Create a coastal
protection system to address flood risk.
Resilient Infrastructure
STRATEGY 7
Develop district- level energy solutions to increase decentralization and redundancy.
Resilient Infrastructure
STRATEGY 8
Expand the use of green infrastructure and other natural systems to manage stormwater, mitigate heat, and provide additional benefits.
Resilient Infrastructure
STRATEGY 6–
Coordinate investments to adapt infrastructure to future climate conditions.
Develop design guidelines for green infrastructure on private property to support co-benefits.
Develop an action plan 8.5 to expand Boston’s urban tree canopy.
Prepare outdoor 8.6 facilities for
# INITIATIVE
Establish Flood Protection Overlay Districts (FPOD)
5.1 and require potential integration with
flood protection. Determine a consistent
5.2 evaluation framework
for flood defense prioritization.
Prioritize and study the 5.3 feasibility of district-scale
flood protection.
Launch a harbor-wide 5.4 flood protection system
WITHIN 2 YEARS
Policies for FPOD are studied.
Evaluation framework is studied.
Evaluation of district-scale flood defenses is initiated.
Evaluation of harbor-wide flood protection is initiated.
WITHIN 5 YEARS
Policies for FPOD are enacted.
Evaluation
framework is established.
Evaluation
is completed for highest-priority sites.
LONG-TERM
# INITIATIVE
Conduct feasibility 7.1 studies for community
energy solutions.
WITHIN 2 YEARS
Launch feasibility studies for community energy solutions at high- priority sites.
Green infrastructure location plan is launched.
New operating model is adopted by City.
Evaluation of incentives is complete.
Canopy inventory is launched.
WITHIN 5 YEARS
Implement community energy solutions at high- priority sites.
LONG-TERM
6.1
ICC is launched.
Data-sharing protocol is established.
Priority evacuation and service roads are identified.
feasibility study.
Establish an Infrastructure Coordination Committee (ICC).
Evaluation of additional sites and continued implementation.
Decision on harbor-wide strategy is reached and, as needed, implementation launched.
Develop a green infrastructure 8.1 location plan for public land
and rights-of-way. Develop a sustainable
8.2 operating model for green infrastructure on public land
and rights-of-way.
Evaluate incentives and 8.3 other tools to support
Continue to collect 6.2 important asset
and hazard data for planning purposes.
Provide guidance 6.3 on priority evacuation
and service road infrastructure to the ICC.
8.7
climate change.
Conduct a comprehensive wetlands inventory and develop a wetlands protection action plan.
IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD
IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD
34 lii City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Executive Summary liii
8.4
Design guidelines are set as regulation.
Canopy inventory is completed.
Adaptations are evaluated and prioritized across portfolio.
Wetlands inventory is completed.
green infrastructure.

 Adapted Buildings
STRATEGY 9– Update building
regulations to support climate readiness.
Adapted Buildings
STRATEGY 10
Retrofit existing buildings against climate hazards.
#
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
INITIATIVE
Establish a planning flood elevation to support zoning regulations in the future floodplain.
Revise zoning code to support climate- ready buildings.
Promote climate readiness for projects in the development pipeline.
Pursue state building code amendments
to promote climate readiness.
Incorporate future climate conditions into area plans.
WITHIN 2 YEARS
Analysis process initiated
Review of zoning code launched.
Notifications are sent to all permitted developments.
Begin working with Commonwealth regarding building code amendments.
Standards are enacted as City policy for future plans.
WITHIN 5 YEARS
Planning flood elevation is established for all development.
Zoning changes are implemented.
LONG-TERM
# INITIATIVE
10.1 Establish a Resilience Audit Program for property owners.
WITHIN 2 YEARS
Priority buildings are identified.
WITHIN 5 YEARS
Priority retrofits are begun.
First tranche of back-up power installation completed.
Toolkit of financing strategies is released.
Evaluation is completed.
City becomes active participant in CRS.
City begins advocacy for reforms that align with Boston’s flood risks.
LONG-TERM
Resilience audit program is launched.
Retrofits continue.
Back-up power installation continues.
IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD
IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD
56 liv City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Executive Summary lv
Prepare municipal facilities for climate change.
Expand back-up power at 10.3 private buildings that serve
vulnerable populations.
Develop toolkit of building retrofit financing strategies.
Evaluate the current 11.1 flood insurance
landscape in Boston.
Join the NFIP Community Rating System.
Advocate for reform 11.3 in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
10.2
10.4
11.2
Adapted Buildings
STRATEGY 11
Insure buildings against flood damage.

 MAYOR MARTIN J. WALSH
   Climate Projection Consensus
To better understand climate change impacts at the local level, the City of Boston and the Green Ribbon Commission convened the Boston Research Advisory Group (BRAG), a team of the region’s top climate scientists, to develop the Climate Projection Consensus.
EXTREME TEMPERATURES
RELATIVE SEA LEVEL RISE
EXTREME PRECIPITATION
COASTAL STORMS
    lvi City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Projection Consensus 01
Image courtesy of Bud Ris
The Climate Projection Consensus summarizes how Boston’s climate is expected to change throughout the twenty-first century, focusing
on four climate factors: extreme temperature, relative sea level rise, extreme precipitation, and coastal storms. These factors drive Boston’s major climate hazards: coastal and riverine flooding, stormwater flooding, and extreme heat (see Vulnerability Assessment for more details on these hazards and their impacts in Boston).
  
 DEVELOPING A SCIENTIFIC CONSENSUS
This chapter is a summary of the BRAG Climate Projection Consensus report, describing future climate impacts in the Boston region, including extreme temperatures, sea level rise, heavy precipitation, and coastal storms. The full report is available at climateready.boston.gov/findings.
The BRAG was overseen by the University
of Massachusetts Boston School for the Environment. BRAG members were organized into four working groups, each focused on a single climate factor: extreme temperature, relative sea level rise, extreme precipitation,
or coastal storms. They collaborated across working groups on phenomena that cut across multiple climate factors, such as possible changes in snow frequency and amounts of coastal and riverine flooding. From October 2015 to January 2016, the working groups reviewed both academic and non-academic literature—including sources that varied in terms of their climate models, spatial resolution (scale), future time periods considered, and historical reference periods—and reported their findings of the scientific consensus. These reports were then compiled and edited by the University of Massachusetts Boston team and peer-reviewed by an international team of experts.
BOSTON’S “80 X 50” COMMITMENT TO EMISSIONS REDUCTION
Almost a decade ago, an Executive Order in Boston set a goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 80 percent below 2005 levels by 2050 for municipal operations, and Boston has since expanded this goal to include citywide emissions. By 2013, there had been significant progress, with citywide emissions reduced by 17 percent1, but there is still much work to be done. Boston’s commitment is roughly in line with the global emissions reductions needed in order to keep the global temperature from rising more than two degrees Celsius relative to pre-industrial levels and with the low-emissions scenario analyzed in this report2. Boston’s emissions are a very small fraction of global emissions; to avoid the worst potential impacts of climate change, the international community must enact strong emissions reduction policies.
1 “2014 Climate Action Plan Update.” Greenovate Boston, 2014.
2 “Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change.” Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014.
 02 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
BOSTON’S FUTURE CLIMATE
  For Boston to effectively plan for the impacts
of climate change, there must be a shared understanding about what these impacts are likely to be. While the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change publishes global climate projections, the impacts of climate change vary
by location, and therefore local projections are needed for better-informed planning. Since the late 2000s, there have been a number of vulnerability assessments and adaptation plans published for the Boston region, which have included local climate change projections. Because knowledge of climate change is continually growing, the BRAG was charged with identifying and evaluating the most-recent data available for the Boston region on climate change impacts.
The findings reported here reflect a consensus among the scientific community, including a scientific approach to uncertainty. Currently, the largest source of uncertainty related to understanding the future impacts of climate change is our lack of knowledge about the future amount of carbon that humans will emit into the atmosphere. To address this issue, scientists have defined a set of possible future carbon emissions
scenarios to underlie their climate projections, based on projections about future population growth, development patterns, and energy use. Climate projections for the next few decades are relatively consistent, regardless of their underlying emissions scenario, because the past 200-plus years of human actions have already caused changes to our climate and will continue to do
so. However, the projections become increasingly different further into the future, because human actions going forward will have an important
and compounding effect on whether climate change accelerates or slows down. Another
source of uncertainty is the complexity of natural processes, which scientists are still working to better understand. There is also a certain amount of naturally occurring interannual and interdecadal climate variability (also called “internal variability”). Finally, there appear to be “tipping points” in the climate system, which have the potential to result in larger, more rapid changes, and our understanding of these events is limited.
These climate projections use three emissions scenarios from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change:
◦ A high-emissions scenario, often characterized as a continuation of business as usual;
◦ A medium-emissions scenario, in which emissions remain around their current levels through 2050 and then are slowly reduced
in the second half of the century through moderate emissions reductions;
◦ A low-emissions scenario, in which net global emissions are reduced to less than a third of their current levels by 2050 and are brought to zero by about 2080 through major emissions reductions.
The magnitude of future changes depends
on our actions today. Our choices about transportation, energy, and land use determine
the level of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
As greenhouse gas emissions increase, so do
the impacts of climate change, like sea level rise, extreme precipitation, and extreme temperature. As we take actions now to address the change that is coming, it is critical that we continue to reduce our emissions and minimize future climate change.
Climate Projection Consensus 03

   EXTREME TEMPERATURES
KEY FINDINGS
Average temperatures in the Northeast have been slowly rising for over a century.
Temperatures in the northeastern United States increased by almost two degrees Fahrenheit between 1895 and 2011.
The rate of increase in average temperatures is accelerating. While over the past century, temperatures in the Northeast rose about two degrees, the increase over the next century may be greater than ten degrees.
As an urban area, Boston tends
to be hotter than surrounding communities that are more suburban or rural. Urban areas generally tend to be hotter than nearby rural areas because concrete, steel, and other building materials retain more heat than vegetation. This phenomenon, known as
the “urban heat island effect,” is compounded by climate change.
Boston’s summers are getting
hotter. While the average summer temperature in Boston from 1981 to 2010 was 69 degrees, it may be as high as 76 degrees by 2050 and 84 degrees by 2100.
There will be more days of extreme heat. Compared to the period from 1971 to 2000, when an average of 11 days per year were over 90 degrees, there may be as many as 40 days over 90 degrees by 2030 and 90 days by 2070—nearly the entire summer.
Heat waves will become more common, last longer, and be hotter. The City of Boston defines heat
waves as periods of three or more days above 90 degrees, and heat waves are a leading cause of weather-related mortality in the United States.
Although winters will likely
be warmer, the risk of frost and freeze damage and cold snaps will continue. While from 1981 to 2010, Boston reached below freezing almost one out of three days per year, by the end of the century, this may happen only around one in ten days.
Future temperatures in Boston will depend on how much we are able to cut our greenhouse gas emissions. The rise in temperatures between now and 2030 is largely consistent among all emission scenarios. However, the scenarios show that cutting emissions now can greatly slow the rise in temperatures in
the second half of the century.
THE NUMBER OF VERY COLD DAYS MAY DECREASE
THE NUMBER OF VERY HOT DAYS WILL INCREASE
  AVERAGE SUMMER TEMPERATURES WILL INCREASE
* Baseline represents historical average from 1971 - 2010, Upper values from high-emissions scenario. Lower values from low-emissions scenario, Data Source: Rossi et al. 2015
   * Baseline represents historical average from 1981 - 2010, Upper values from high-emissions scenario. Lower values from low-emissions scenario, Data Source: Houser et al 2015
   * Baseline represents historical average from 1981 - 2010, **Upper values from high-emissions scenario. Lower values from low-emissions scenario, Data Source: Houser et al. 2015
Climate Projection Consensus 05
 
   SEA LEVEL RISE
KEY FINDINGS
Sea level rise is caused by a combination of land ice melting, thermal expansion, and changes in land water storage.
Land ice melting includes the melting of mountain (alpine) glaciers, ice caps, and the continental-scale ice sheets on Greenland, West Antarctica, and East Antarctica. Thermal expansion describes the phenomenon that, as water warms, it generally occupies
a greater volume. Land water storage describes activities that affect the amount of water stored on land, such
as holding water in reservoirs or behind dams or pumping out underground water for irrigation and use by people.
The relative sea level in Boston Harbor has risen over the past century. From 1921 to 2015, the overall trend in relative sea level rise was about 0.11 inches per year. Relative sea level is the difference in elevation between the sea surface and land surface at a specific place and time, so relative sea level rise can result from a combination of changes in the sea surface and changes in the land surface. In Boston, the sinking of the land surface—called “subsidence”—is relatively minor compared to changes
in sea levels.
The pace of relative sea level rise is accelerating. Over the entire twentieth century, sea levels rose about nine inches relative to land. Another eight inches
of relative sea level rise may happen by 2030, almost three times faster. By 2050, the sea level may be as much as 1.5 feet higher than it was in 2000, and as much as 3 feet higher in 2070.
As sea levels rise, a deeper harbor
will mean higher and more powerful waves. Although Boston remains relatively protected from Atlantic waves by Winthrop, Hull, and the Harbor Islands, stronger waves are more likely to damage sea walls and erode beaches. The outer islands and peninsula shorelines of Boston Harbor are likely to experience these impacts to a greater extent than the Boston proper shoreline.
A major reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions can have a tremendous impact on the future of Boston Harbor. While sea level rise projections for
2030 are consistent across all emission scenarios, in later years big differences exist between scenarios. With a sharp emissions reduction, we may be able to keep end-of-century sea level rise to under two feet, while higher emissions may result in over seven feet of
sea level rise.
Data Source: BRAG Report, 2016
THE AMOUNT OF SEA LEVEL RISE DEPENDS ON GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
SEA LEVEL RISE IN BOSTON DURING THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
  Climate Projection Consensus 07
 
 EXTREME PRECIPITATION
KEY FINDINGS
In the Northeast, there has already been a very large increase in the intensity of extreme rain and snow.
From 1958 to 2010, there was a 70 percent increase in the amount of precipitation that fell on the days with the heaviest precipitation.
This increase is greater in the Northeast than for any other region of the country.
The increase in extreme precipitation is expected to continue. As the climate warms, more ocean water evaporates into the air, and warmer air can hold more water, supporting heavier precipitation events. Heavy precipitation events will continue
to increase in Boston. However, due to the complexity of the processes underlying precipitation as well as natural variability, the magnitude of this increase is not yet clear.
While the total amount of annual snowfall will decrease, there may still be some heavy snow events through the end of the century. Based on regional projections, total snow accumulations could decrease 31 to 48 percent by 2100, and the start of the snow season is expected to be delayed.
However, changes in daily heavy snowfall events can be quite different from changes in annual snowfall. Expected changes to individual heavy snow events, ice storms, and drought are not clear.
Both stormwater and riverine flooding are affected by extreme precipitation. Boston’s stormwater drainage system may be overwhelmed by major rain events. It may be further compromised by sea level rise as drain outlets are flooded by the rising ocean, reducing the ability of the drainage system to convey stormwater to the coast. River flooding is also likely to increase,
but there are large uncertainties associated with river flooding due to the complexity of the climate and hydrological systems involved.
If we take action to cut global greenhouse gas emissions, we can prevent the most extreme precipitation projections from becoming a reality.
A commonly used measure of major rain and snow events is the amount of precipitation that has at most a one- in-ten annual chance of falling during
a 24-hour period. While projections
for these events are similar in the
short term across different emission scenarios, by the end of the century, the difference between medium and high scenarios is about 10 percent.
RAINFALL FROM STORMS WILL INCREASE
  Climate Projection Consensus 09
 
  STORMS
KEY FINDINGS
For Boston, the
storms that are of greatest concern are extratropical cyclones, followed by tropical cyclones.
Extratropical cyclones, which are more common and longer lasting
in the Northeast than tropical cyclones, currently produce most of the storm-induced flooding in the Boston region and will continue to
do so in the near future. These are storms that originate outside of the tropics and are sometimes called nor’easters. They can form during any time of the year but are most prevalent in the extended cold-season months. Tropical cyclones are storms that originate in the tropics and are called hurricanes once they reach a sustained wind speed of more than 74 miles per hour.
Current climate projections do not provide a clear projection of how the intensity, frequency, and trajectory (tracks) of tropical and extratropical storms will change. Extratropical storms (like blizzards and nor’easters) have cold air at their centers. Tropical storms, on the other hand, have warm air, which means that they can develop into hurricanes more quickly. There are large uncertainties about how climate change will affect future storms. This is particularly true for extratropical storms. For tropical storms, there is some evidence that their intensity has been increasing.
If tropical storm intensity increases, major hurricanes (Category 3 and greater) could occur more frequently, even if the total number of tropical storms does not increase.
Rising sea levels mean that any given storm will cause more flooding in the future than it would today. During a storm, winds can blow ocean water toward the land, creating a “storm surge” on top of the baseline sea level. When storm surge is combined with tidal processes,
the result is known as a “storm tide.” With higher seas, less precipitation and a less powerful storm surge can produce the same amount of flooding as a more powerful storm would produce when the seas are lower.
Image courtesy of Sasaki
Climate Projection Consensus 11
 
 MAYOR MARTIN J. WALSH
Climate Vulnerability Assessment
As the climate continues to change, three major climate hazards will increasingly impact Boston: extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding.
12 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Each of these hazards impacts the city’s people, buildings, infrastructure, environment, and economy in different ways.
Stormwater flooding and extreme heat
are evaluated as frequent or chronic hazards1 that gradually degrade personal and economic well-being and directly expose parts of every neighborhood in Boston. Coastal and riverine flooding is expected to be an acute hazard for much of the remainder of the century, experienced through major storm events with immediate and long-lasting impacts. Moreover, as sea levels continue to rise, coastal flooding from high tides is expected to become a chronic hazard, potentially flooding many low-lying neighborhoods along the waterfront on a monthly basis. This is in addition to acute storm events, which are expected to become more severe and cause greater damage
over time. This chapter, the Climate Ready Boston Vulnerability Assessment, analyzes how people, buildings, infrastructure,
and the economy are affected by climate hazards. Vulnerability Assessment findings are reported at two scales: first, at the city scale (referred to herein as the Citywide Exposure and Consequence Analysis);
and second, at the scale of neighborhoods
or groups of neighborhoods, referred to as focus areas. The Citywide Exposure and Consequence Analysis includes a discussion of socially vulnerable populations in the city: people who are more vulnerable to climate hazards due to life circumstances such as poverty, poor health, and limited English proficiency. The citywide
1 Both heat and stormwater flooding also have the capacity to impact
the city through severe, acute events. Boston currently experiences heat indexes greater than 90 degrees more than once a year. Over time, the number of days at which this heat index is reached will continue to grow, increasing an already chronic issue. Climate Ready Boston evaluates stormwater flooding at the 10-year, 24-hour frequency event, though more and less severe and frequent events are known to occur. This evaluation is in line with the assessment led by the Boston Water and Sewer Commission, as well as the target level of performance for drainage systems within the City of Boston.
assessment also considers the nature of
the three climate hazards, as well as their separate and diverse expected effects on Boston’s people, buildings, infrastructure, and the economy. The Exposure and Consequence Analysis for Focus Areas was developed to provide deeper insight into exposure and consequences as a result of coastal flood hazards in specific vulnerable areas within the Boston community. Climate Ready Boston is able to address coastal flood hazard for coastal focus areas due to the robust nature of the information available, quality of evaluation possible at that scale, and magnitude of expected consequences throughout this century. The following focus areas have been examined for coastal flood hazard beyond the details provided at the citywide scale:
◦ Charlestown
◦ Charles River neighborhoods2 ◦ East Boston
◦ Dorchester
◦ Downtown
◦ South Boston
◦ South End
An eighth focus area, Roxbury, serves as an illustrative example of the interplay
of the three hazards reviewed in this Vulnerability Assessment with multiple social vulnerability factors and their effects on collective risk and resilience planning.
2 The Charles River neighborhoods include Allston/Brighton, Back Bay, Beacon Hill, and Fenway/Kenmore. These neighborhoods are expected to be exposed to overtopping or flanking of the Charles River Dam.
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 13
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
   
PROCESS OVERVIEW
The Climate Ready Boston Vulnerability Assessment evaluates three climate hazards and their plausible changes over time due to climate change:
◦ Chronic extreme heat
◦ Frequent stormwater flooding
◦ Acute and chronic coastal and riverine flooding
Climate Ready Boston developed a methodology unique to each hazard to evaluate impacts on people, buildings, infrastructure, and the economy. Boston’s socially vulnerable populations, which are less able to prepare for, adapt to, and bounce back from climate impacts, received particular attention.
Methodologies vary for each hazard due to the quality and granularity of data available. In the case of extreme heat, for instance, a detailed risk assessment of infrastructure and the economy is impractical due to data limitations. Accordingly, the impacts to people and buildings are the primary focus. In the case of the stormwater flooding, the evaluation of buildings and infrastructure is largely qualitative. In contrast, a rich coastal and riverine flooding dataset is available for multiple sea level rise conditions and coastal storm flood probabilities that can
be used to quantitatively assess exposures, vulnerabilities, and consequences.3
3 Quantitative results presented in this report are preliminary and are based
on data with inherent uncertainties, as well as generalized assumptions, as opposed to site-specific assessment of assets, structures, and population present within specific buildings. For example, the first-floor elevation of a structure is assumed to be at grade. In actuality, many residential structures are split, and steps at grade may descend to the first floor (potentially increasing flood loss), and other structures may be elevated or flood-proofed above grade. Site-specific evaluations of vulnerability are beyond the scope of
this assessment and should be reserved for detailed evaluation of specific adaptation measures. Values should be interpreted as indicators of relative risk among different areas within the city.
14 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
  THE VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT EVALUATES THESE THREE CLIMATE HAZARDS:
     EXTREME HEAT
Heat is a chronic hazard, a stress that the city faces every year. As average temperatures rise and the frequency, duration, and intensity of heat waves increase, heat mortality rates will also rise. Temperatures are hottest in areas of the city that experience the urban heat island effect, but on very hot days, the entire city is
at risk for the health impacts of extreme heat, especially those with health or other physical challenges, such as older adults or those with medical illness. The heat will increasingly stress the city’s energy supply and related infrastructure as people seek ways to cool down.
FREQUENT STORMWATER FLOODING
The extent of frequent stormwater flooding4 is expected to grow
over time, further limiting access and mobility during flood events across the city. Due to limitations in available data, this study assesses frequent stormwater flooding
only. Though high-severity, low- probability rain events are not assessed, the impacts of frequent flooding are informative to long- term planning as they can have broad societal effects and can be particularly disruptive for people who already face significant challenges due to poverty, illness, or other social vulnerability factors. Frequent stormwater flooding is a citywide concern in Boston, with 7 percent of the total land area in the city likely to be exposed to the 10- year, 24-hour event as soon as the 2050s and 9 percent by the end of the century. West Roxbury, Allston, Brighton, East Boston, and South Dorchester have the largest areas of land affected by stormwater flooding, while the South End and South Boston can expect to see
the greatest increase in land area exposed to stormwater flooding as sea levels rise and precipitation events become more extreme.
4 The Vulnerability Assessment evaluates 10-year, 24-hour storm events. It does not evaluate more severe events, like the 100- year, 24-hour storm events.
COASTAL & RIVERINE FLOODING
Coastal and riverine flooding is expected to lead to the most significant climate hazard consequences. Flooding will
be concentrated in low-lying waterfront neighborhoods, particularly Charlestown, Downtown, East Boston, South Boston, and, later in the century, the South End and Dorchester. Due to sea level rise, late in the century, coastal and riverine flooding will affect Boston both during storm events and during high tides, which will cause large-scale flooding in some neighborhoods.
Building upon previous work
by the City, other government agencies, and private entities,
the Climate Ready Boston Vulnerability Assessment uses
the best available hazard data, adjusted in some cases to align with the climate projection consensus developed by the Boston Research Advisory Group (BRAG), the first component of the Climate Ready Boston initiative (see Climate Projection Consensus chapter, p.01).
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 15

 EXPOSURE, VULNERABILITY,
CONSEQUENCES, AND RISK
Exposure signifies people, buildings, infrastructure, and other resources (assets) that are within areas that are most likely to experience hazard impacts. Nevertheless, exposure analysis does not provide insight into the extent or severity of exposure or even whether the people, buildings, or infrastructure will experience loss, as it does not consider site specific conditions (e.g., building flood-proofing) that may prevent or limit impacts.
Vulnerability refers to how and why people or assets could be affected by a hazard or how and why the effects could be exacerbated or limited. Assessing vulnerabilities requires site- specific or demographic information, such as existing flood-proofing measures or whether people have vehicles that could facilitate evacuation.
Consequence analysis illustrates to what extent people or assets can be expected
to be affected by a hazard, as a result
of combined vulnerability and exposure. Consequences are qualitative and quantitative impacts to exposed and vulnerable people, buildings, or infrastructure, and many can be communicated in terms
of economic losses. Categories of loss quantified for this analysis include direct physical damages to buildings (including structure, contents, and inventory damage), human impacts or stress factors (mental stress, anxiety, and lost productivity), displacement costs (the cost to relocate a business or household as a result of flood impacts), and losses to the city’s economy due to business interruption. The consequence analysis
also evaluates shelter needs expected as
a result of a coastal flood event, but these consequences are not separately monetized.
Risk is essentially the combination of exposure, vulnerability, and consequences. Risk is often defined as the product of both the probability and consequences of an impact and is expressed in this report as annualized losses.
16 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 CONNECTING CLIMATE PROJECTIONS TO THE VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT’S HAZARD ANALYSIS
  Climate Factors for Climate Projection Consensus
Climate Hazards from Vulnerability Assessment
GEOGRAPHIC VARIABILITY OF HAZARDS
Two climate hazards—extreme heat and stormwater flooding—generally pose similar threats citywide; thus, the challenges and basic principles of many preparedness efforts related to heat and stormwater hazards remain largely the same across neighborhoods. In contrast, coastal and riverine flooding hazards vary widely by neighborhood and throughout time. Possible adaptations are dependent on the location in
the city, community context and the people
and businesses that reside in the area, the entry point along the waterfront leading to flooding, variation in topography, and the coastal or riverine conditions defining the flood hazard (e.g., the duration of flooding).
Level of detail also varies spatially (e.g., neighborhood versus citywide) based on best available data and methodological approaches by hazard. Exposure to each hazard is assessed in the Citywide Exposure and Consequence Analysis. Coastal flood hazard details are further explored
in the Exposure and Consequence Analysis for Focus Areas, which were selected for additional assessment at a more granular level due the robust nature of the information available, quality of evaluation possible at that scale, and magnitude of expected consequences throughout this century. The Roxbury neighborhood has been selected as
a case study example of the interplay of multiple hazards with multiple social vulnerability factors and their effects on both collective risk and resiliency planning.
     Climate Vulnerability Assessment 17

HAZARDS
A description of each of the three hazards evaluated as part of this Vulnerability Assessment, the motivation for assessing a given hazard,
the Climate Ready Boston climate projections analyzed, and hazard data available from previous studies are outlined below.
EXTREME HEAT
Boston will experience both an increase in average temperatures and more extreme heat events. Heat waves can cause risks to health,
but the negative consequences of heat on the population can be mitigated with effective measures to prepare individuals and communities. Heat is especially dangerous to those with health challenges, and it puts strain on the natural and built environment, including through energy demands and damage caused by heat expansion in building and road materials.
This assessment outlines anticipated increases
in average temperature and extreme heat events and the impact these changes will have on public health. The Climate Ready Boston Climate Projection Consensus evaluated data from many recent studies performed across the northeast; data sources used include projections for average temperatures and heat waves, as well as analysis of the urban heat island (UHI) effect.
Locally, a heat wave is defined most often
(and for the purposes of this study) as three or more days in a row with maximum ambient temperatures greater than 90 degrees Fahrenheit. The Vulnerability Assessment used data and projections created as part of the City of Cambridge Vulnerability Assessment, supplemented by the Kopp and Rassmussen 2014 projections to best understand and analyze frequency, intensity,
and duration of extreme temperatures in Boston.
The Vulnerability Assessment uses the Trust for Public Land’s (TPL) base heat island analysis5
to understand future UHIs and temperature severity in Boston areas. Since extreme heat will be experienced across the city, there are no “exposure” statistics to report, and focusing only on the exposure to heat islands would be misleading; populations and infrastructure across the city will be at risk of the impacts of hotter temperatures.
Many of the consequences of extreme heat are not readily quantifiable. Instead, understanding that loss of life is a severe risk that a city or community can face, the assessment focuses
on quantifying an increase in heat mortality and analyzing qualitatively the other consequences of extreme heat, including increased morbidity (illness), increased energy use, and environmental impacts.
STORMWATER FLOODING
For the purposes of this study, frequent stormwater flooding has been assessed using a 10-year, 24-hour design storm. Changes in frequent stormwater flooding over time were evaluated based on projected changes to extreme precipitation and
sea level rise but assuming no changes to the current stormwater drainage system.6 Even with current sea levels and precipitation intensities, Boston’s existing stormwater drainage system is designed to handle 4.8 inches of rain in 24 hours7 and can become overwhelmed by fairly frequent rain events (e.g., the 10-year, 24-hour storm, approximately 5.24 inches of rain in 24 hours8), leading to pooling of water on streets and localized flooding. Conveying collected stormwater will prove even more challenging with the addition
of sea level rise and more intense precipitation. This design storm was selected because the Boston Water and Sewer Commission’s (BWSC)
5 While Climate Ready Boston has not analyzed future heat island projections in this report, Rossi et al. observed a general trend that UHIs tend to remain in place (and increase in severity) in warmer future scenarios, which were applied in this UHI analysis. UHI is understood through spatial analysis conducted by the TPL to identify specific localities in Boston that experience higher temperatures than the city average locality during days with hot temperatures. The TPL maps show relative land surface temperature data from MODIS/Aqua radiometer satellite (MODIS MYD11A2) from the warmest summer months. They identify the specific locations in urban areas that meet the characteristics of UHI isotherms and have land surface temperatures averaging at least 1.25 degrees Fahrenheit above the mean temperature for both day and night scenarios.
Wastewater Facilities Study9 used the storm to conduct a climate assessment; the BWSC data are the best available set of comprehensive stormwater flooding data throughout the city.10 Additionally, the BWSC data align with the Climate Ready Boston climate projections for sea level rise (SLR) and precipitation.11 Specifically, three BWSC 10-year, 24-hour stormwater flood extents were evaluated citywide.12
  LIKELY YEARS OF INITIAL OCCURRENCE
 VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT SLR (ABOVE CURRENT TIDE LEVELS)
 10-YEAR, 24-HOUR RAINFALL DEPTH
 2030S–2050S13
2050S–2100S14
2070S OR LATER15
9 INCHES
21 INCHES
36 INCHES
5.6 INCHES
5.8 INCHES
6.0 INCHES
      10-YEAR, 24-HOUR STORM
Consistent with the BWSC Wastewater Facilities Study, the Vulnerability Assessment uses the 10-year, 24-hour design storm to approximate stormwater flooding extents due to changing sea levels and extreme precipitation over time.
A 10-year storm has a 10 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded any given year. A 24-hour design condition defines the duration of intense rainfall. Though rainfall can be less or more intense, and the duration can last hours to days, only 10-
year, 24-hour design storm data are available for this analysis. More intense rainfall, like 100-year events (i.e., those with a 1 percent chance of occurring in a given year), are not considered due to data limitations but are important to understanding the full spectrum of vulnerabilities related to stormwater flooding.
18 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 19
Due to model and data limitations associated with the BWSC analysis, stormwater flooding exposure is reported at the citywide scale. The Vulnerability Assessment estimates direct exposure to buildings and the residents within those buildings but does not describe impacts to individual buildings or infrastructure assets.16 Additional qualitative assessments are made where possible. In contrast, the available coastal and riverine flooding data allow for an assessment of individual buildings and infrastructure and a more detailed discussion both at the citywide and neighborhood scale.
6 The analysis assumes that the current stormwater drainage system remains as it is today, though the Boston Water and Sewer Commission has plans to improve the system incrementally over time.
12 See Appendix for a comparison of the flood data used in this analysis to current conditions, as well as a description of system current conditions.
13 Climate condition and stormwater hazard flooding data are the BWSC Wastewater Facilities Study medium sea level rise scenario for 2035. The exact BWSC sea level rise value examined is 0.87 feet above 2010 tide levels, in combination with a 10-year, 24- hour rainfall of 5.55 inches.
7 Source: Sullivan, John “Climate Adaptation Challenges for Boston’s Water and Sewer Systems.” Presentation for the National Association of Flood and Stormwater Management Agencies. October 15, 2014.
8
Source: Jewell, Charlie, John Sullivan, Bill McMillin. “BWSC Climate Change Risk Assessment: Findings and Mitigation/Adaptation Strategies for Wastewater and Storm Drainage.” Presentation for the NEWEA Annual Conference and Exhibit. January 28, 2015
Climate condition and stormwater hazard flooding data are the BWSC Wastewater
9 Source: “Wastewater and Storm Drainage System Facilities Plan.” CH2M Hill Companies, Ltd. Final Report to Boston Water and Sewer Commission. June, 2015.
10 BWSC examined multiple stormwater flooding conditions, including the impacts
of coastal storms on stormwater flooding. Because coastal and riverine flooding is addressed separately using the recently developed MassDOT-FHWA analysis data,
the BWSC data carried forward into this Vulnerability Assessment are the stormwater flooding data that combined future sea level rise and extreme precipitation conditions only.
value examined is 1.71 feet above 2010 tide levels in combination with a 10-year, 24- hour rainfall of 5.76 inches.
15 Climate condition and stormwater hazard flooding data are the BWSC Wastewater Facilities Study precautionary sea level rise scenario for 2060. The exact BWSC sea level rise value examined is 2.76 feet above 2010 tide levels in combination with a 10-year, 24-hour rainfall of 6.03 inches.
16 Per the BWSC Wastewater Facilities Study: “It is not appropriate to use [these data] for detailed analysis (i.e., at the community or parcel-level) and [these data] should not be used as the sole source of flood elevation information. It does not necessarily identify
all areas subject to flooding particularly from local drainage sources of small size. Users should be aware that inundation areas are calculated by mathematical models with precision that is limited to historical calibrations.”
BWSC Wastewater Facilities Study data considered two climate change scenarios,
11
B2 (medium) and A1FI (precautionary). For extreme precipitation, the BWSC medium climate scenario aligns with the BRAG moderate emissions reduction projections, while the precautionary scenario aligns with the BRAG business-as-usual emissions projections.
14
Facilities Study medium sea level rise scenario for 2060. The exact BWSC sea level rise

 COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOODING
Coastal and riverine flood hazard data used in
this Vulnerability Assessment define estimated flood depths and extents as a result of tide levels, riverine flows, coastal storms, and sea level rise. The flood hazard data were selected to capture a spectrum of acute events (e.g., severe coastal storms combined with sea level rise) and chronic flooding (e.g., potential frequent flooding due to high tide and sea level rise alone, without storms).
In order to define a range of possible flood conditions for Climate Ready Boston (higher probability / lower impact through lower probability / higher impact), 10 percent, 2 percent, 1 percent, and 0.1 percent annual chance flood extents and depths were generated for three
sea level rise conditions using data provided by MassDOT-FHWA. The Climate Ready Boston flood data (all four probabilities) for 9 inches17 and 36 inches18 of sea level rise are largely identical to the
17 Climate scenario and coastal/riverine hazard flooding data are the MassDOT-FHWA high sea level rise scenario for 2030. Actual sea level rise value is 0.62 feet above 2013 tide levels, with an additional 0.74 inches to account for subsidence.
MassDOT-FHWA data, and the data for 21 inches of sea level rise were created specifically for Climate Ready Boston.19
The Climate Ready Boston evaluation also considers flood hazards from high tides and sea level rise alone—meaning “blue sky” conditions, without storms. Because the Boston area has a large tide range, a combined sea level rise and high tide
flood exposure evaluation must also consider
the frequency of occurrence of tide levels. This Vulnerability Assessment combines an average monthly high tide level20 with sea level rise to define future high-tide flooding exposure. Average monthly high tide is approximately two feet higher than the commonly used mean higher high water (MHHW, the average of the higher high water levels of each tidal day), and lower than king tides (the twice-a- year high tides that occur when the gravitational pulls of the sun and the moon are aligned).
18 Climate scenario and coastal/riverine hazard flooding data are the MassDOT-FHWA high sea level rise scenario for 2070/intermediate sea level rise scenario for 2100. Actual sea level rise value is 3.2 feet above 2013 tide levels, with an additional 2.5 inches to account for subsidence.
19 Data were interpolated from the MassDOT-FHWA 2030 and 2070/2100 data. 20 Average highest tide for each month in 2015.
CLIMATE READY BOSTON SEA LEVEL SCENARIOS COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOODING
      VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT SLR (above current sea level)
9 inches
LIKELY YEARS OF INITIAL OCCURRENCE
  Major Emissions Reduction
 SELECTION OF SEA LEVEL RISE21 CONDITIONS
Sea levels, or the difference in elevation between the sea surface and land surface, have risen in Boston over the past century due to multiple, complex, and simultaneous processes. These processes include thermal expansion and ice-sheet melt, the gravitational effect of ice-sheet melt, ocean dynamics, and vertical land movement (such as local subsidence).
From 1921 to 2015, the overall trend in sea level rise was approximately 1.1 inches per decade. From 1990 to 2010,
the average rate increased to 2.1 inches of sea level rise per decade. This means that Boston’s 2015 sea levels are about 3 inches higher than 2000.
The pace of sea level rise is accelerating. Sea level rise projections by 2030 are consistent across all emissions scenarios evaluated in Climate Ready Boston, with likely sea level rise rates ranging from historic rates to 3 inches per decade (a nearly 50 percent higher rate of increase than the last two decades). Later in the century, the rate of sea level rise is expected to further accelerate, with significant variation between emissions scenarios (see the Climate Projection Consensus for more information on this topic).
21 Relative sea level rise, including subsidence, is considered in this document. Though the term “sea level rise” is used throughout the document, this Vulnerability Assessment is referring to relative sea level rise, and not just rise in sea levels alone. Additionally, in many graphs and tables, the acronym “SLR” is used.
20 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
• Three sea level rise conditions have been used in the evaluation: 9 inches, 21 inches, and 36 inches above current sea levels.22 These selected conditions reflect
a range of sea level rise conditions likely to occur before the end of the century in the three emissions scenarios considered.
• By the end of the 2050s, 9 inches of sea level rise is expected consistently across emissions scenarios and is likely to occur as early as the 2030s.
• In the second half of the century, 21 inches is expected across all emissions scenarios.
• The highest sea level rise considered, 36 inches, is highly probable toward the end of the century. This scenario has
a greater than 50 percent chance of occurring within this time period for the moderate emissions reduction and business-as-usual scenarios and a nearly 50 percent chance for the major emissions reduction scenario.
22 The BRAG Climate Projection Consensus report documented sea level changes relative to a year 2000 reference level, while the Vulnerability Assessment assumes current (2016) sea levels as a reference level. Current sea levels are about three inches higher than those in 2000. See the Climate Projection Summary in this report for more information.
These three sea level rise conditions do not include the worst-case scenarios but instead together define a likely range before the end of the century. Though these three scenarios are used for qualitative and quantitative assessment in this study, more severe and even worst-case sea level rise scenarios should also be considered as part of future climate-related studies. Evaluation and design of adaptation measures should consider that more severe sea level rise conditions are possible; the BRAG’s “business as usual” scenario estimates that seven feet of sea level rise is within the likely range by the end of the century.
COASTAL FLOOD HAZARD DATA
The majority of the coastal flood hazard data created as part of this assessment are a reanalysis of the coastal flood hazard data developed as part of the
MassDOT-FHWA analysis.
hazards using state-of-the-art numerical models capable of simulating thousands of potential nor’easters and tropical storms coincident with a range of tide levels, riverine flow rates in the Charles and Mystic Rivers, and sea level rise conditions.
The City of Boston used a similar approach and the same technical team as the MassDOT-FHWA analysis when working with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the development of flood insurance rate maps (FIRM)
that went into effect on March 16, 2016. The FEMA FIRMs define current flood
risk from a regulatory perspective. Nevertheless, the data available from the MassDOT-FHWA analysis are used in this study because unlike the FEMA FIRMs, the MassDOT-FHWA data account for sea level rise and other climate related
factors. More details can be found in the Appendix.
23 Bosma, Kirk, et al. “MassDOT-FHWA Pilot Project Report: Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessments and Adaptation Options for the Central Artery.” MassDOT FHWA Report. June 2015. https://www. massdot.state.ma.us/Portals/8/docs/environmental/SustainabilityEMS/Pilot_Project_Report_MassDOT_FHWA.pdf.
2030s–2050s
2060s–2100s
2030s–2050s
2060s–2090s
2030s–2050s
    21 inches
2050s–2080s
    36 inches
2090s OR LATER
2080s OR LATER
2070s OR LATER
 23
In 2015, MassDOT released an analysis of coastal flood
Moderate Emissions Reduction
Business as usual
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 21

JUNE 1–JUNE 15, 2016 OBSERVED WATER LEVELS, BOSTON, MA
  PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD VERSUS 100-YEAR FLOOD
A “1 percent annual chance flood” is a flood event that has a 1 in 100 chance of occurring in any given year. Another name for this flood, which is the primary coastal flood hazard delineated in FEMA FIRMs, is the “100-year flood.” Experts prefer not to use the “100-year” term, since it gives the impression that a certain level of flooding will reliably occur once every 100 years. In fact, it has a 1 percent chance of occurring in any given year and can even occur multiple times in a single year or decade, or it can occur less frequently. Over a 30-year period, there is almost a one in three chance that
a 1 percent annual chance flood will occur at least once.
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
  SOCIAL VULNERABILITY
Social vulnerability is defined as the disproportionate susceptibility of some social groups to the impacts of hazards. These impacts could include death, injury, loss, or disruption of life or livelihood. Social vulnerability also affects a population’s resilience: ability to adequately recover from or avoid
impacts. Vulnerability is a function of demographic characteristics of the population, as well as environmental and community conditions such as healthcare provision, social capital, access to social networks, and social isolation.
  Observation Data from NOAA Gauge Observations (Station 8443970 in Fort Point Channel)
“Average Monthly High Tide” is an average of the highest monthly tides
EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCES: AN INTRODUCTION TO THE VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT CALCULATIONS
PEOPLE
Boston enjoys a richly diverse population; a key part of Climate Ready Boston is analyzing how climate hazards will impact Boston’s residents.
The Vulnerability Assessment quantifies exposures to populations as a whole, with an additional qualitative focus on vulnerable populations expected to be disproportionately affected by
each hazard.
Not all residents are equally able to prepare
for, adapt to, and bounce back from temperature and flood hazards. Those most vulnerable to current hazards are expected to be impacted
the most as hazards worsen with climate change. Climate Ready Boston specifically considers the populations in Boston more vulnerable to these hazards. The Climate Resilience Initiatives chapter (see p.74) describes options for increasing resiliency for these groups.
Seven groups who tend to be especially vulnerable to heat and flood hazards have been considered:24
◦ Older adults (65+)
◦ Children
◦ People of color
◦ People with limited English proficiency
◦ People with low to no income
◦ People with disabilities
◦ People with chronic and acute medical illness
These groups are not necessarily independent. For example, immigrants are often those with limited English proficiency.25 Each vulnerability
24 Several studies and methodologies surrounding social vulnerability informed this analysis, including the Social Vulnerability Index and a 2015 study by Dr. Atyia Martin, which used advanced Boston-specific data to assess how various determinants of social vulnerability relate to one another (co-occurrences) and to identify primary variables that capture the full range of vulnerabilities. Source: Martin, S. Atyia. “A Framework to Understand the Relationship between Social Factors That Reduce Resilience in Cities: Application to the City of Boston.” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 12:53–80. 2015.
25 Ibid.
can be thought of as a stressor that the individual or household experiences, limiting that person or household’s ability to adapt to and absorb chronic or frequent stresses from climate hazards (e.g., heat or stormwater flooding hazards) or recover from acute events (e.g., coastal storm flooding).
Data regarding social vulnerability to climate change face some limitations; it can be difficult
to differentiate between inherent challenges
to socially vulnerable populations and climate- specific challenges and impacts. Similarly, solutions to create more resilient neighborhoods often overlap with solutions to strengthen the community as a whole. In-depth research into how different social vulnerabilities correlate and overlap is in somewhat early stages, making it difficult to quantify how much belonging to one or more socially vulnerable group changes the way a person is affected by climate hazards. Overlapping groups can lead to over-counting; the assessment quantifies how many people in one specific vulnerable group live in a neighborhood but not the total number of vulnerable residents, due to the potential for one individual to belong to multiple groups.
In its evaluation of exposure to and consequences of impact as a result of heat or frequent stormwater flooding, the Vulnerability Assessment takes a
22 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 23

 VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT LOSS CATEGORIES
 LOSS CATEGORY
 LOSSES CONSIDERED
 DESCRIPTION
 STRESS FACTORS
SHELTER NEEDS
DIRECT PHYSICAL DAMAGES TO BUILDINGS
DISPLACEMENT
• Mental stress and Anxiety • Lost Productivity
• Number of people and households in need of public shelter
• Structure Damage • Content Loss
• Inventory Loss
• One time displacement and relocation costs
Natural disasters threaten or cause the loss of health, social, and economic resources, which leads to psychological distress. Stress factors are a product of damage to people’s homes and are quantified as treatment costs and as lost income.29
Shelter needs for coastal and riverine flood events are calculated as a function of flood depth and certain social vulnerability factors, such as age and income of the affected population.
Direct physical damages include the destruction and degradation of buildings as a result of coastal or riverine flooding and are quantifiable as monetary losses.
Displacement costs are associated with moving a household or a business to a new location and resuming activity in that new location.
consider the portion of the population expected to actively seek treatment and not all of those who will likely experience some sort of impairment as a result of the stress from an event.
Additional consequence calculations related
to the city’s population are captured within the coastal and riverine evaluations for buildings and the economy and should be considered when planning for both the general population and vulnerable people. Such calculations include relocation and displacement costs as well as potential job loss. More information on these topics is provided below.
BUILDINGS
Climate Ready Boston developed an understanding of both exposure and potential consequences
of climate hazard impacts to the city’s current building stock through a number of steps described in detail in the Appendix and briefly described here. First, Climate Ready Boston compiled a comprehensive building stock inventory from a variety of sources. The information gathered from these sources was reconciled and reviewed for overlap, inaccuracies, and need for clarity. Data fields used for the evaluation were extensive and include such structure characteristics as location, footprint, use, number of stories, and real estate market value. Based on the location, use, size,
and type of structure, analysts developed building construction and replacement costs,30 one-time disruption costs31 for the structure, and expected contents and inventory32 as well as rental rates33 and other assumptions that would be needed to
30 Building replacement values per square foot were obtained by analysts from RSMeans2016 square footage costs for building types in the Boston area. See Appendix for more detail.
31One-time disruption costs are essentially costs to move people or contents from one location to another and have been developed using FEMA Hazus values. See Appendix TBD for more detail.
32 The contents replacement value is based on the contents-to-structure ratio values (CSRV) for residential and non-residential structures from data obtained through surveys in the West Shore Lake Pontchartrain Hurricane and Storm Damage Risk Reduction Study. Source: “West Shore Lake Pontchartrain Hurricane and Storm Damage Risk Reduction Study—Final Integrated Feasibility Study Report and Environmental Impact Statement.” USACE. November 2014.
33 Based on 2016 local market rates. See Appendix for more detail.
understand potential financial consequences in the case of flood impacts. Grade-elevation data was combined with the building stock in order to analyze the extent and depth of flooding that could occur at and within each structure based on the flood hazard data described above.
Flood exposure was determined by cross- referencing structure location data with stormwater, coastal, and riverine flood hazard overlays and has been calculated based on structures shown to currently exist within areas identified as future flood hazard areas. Exposure results for flood hazard can be reported based on any number of structure characteristics and are provided in this report by number and type of structures exposed, exposed square footage, and real estate market value exposed. Exposure to heat hazard is pervasive across the city, with higher heat indexes expected within urban heat islands.
Consequences of coastal and riverine flood damage were evaluated based on depth damage functions developed by the United States Army Corps (USACE) for this region following Hurricane Sandy.34 Flood depths at each structure are cross- referenced with depth damage functions that provide expected percent loss and expected displacement times (number of days that the structure is expected to be uninhabitable) for
the structure.35 Costs of displacement36 and direct physical damage to buildings were then calculated based on percent loss and displacement time combined with structure replacement costs and disruption costs and rental rates, respectively.
34 Source: “North Atlantic Coast Comprehensive Study (NAACS).” U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. http://www.nad.usace.army.mil/CompStudy.
35 One-time disruption costs are essentially costs to move people or contents from one location to another and have been developed using FEMA Hazus values. See Appendix TBD for more detail.
36 Displacement or relocation costs are calculated based on numerous factors to include local rental rates, owner occupancy rates, structure flood depths, and others. See Appendix for full methodology.
    more qualitative approach, though it also explores numbers and demographics of people expected
to be affected. The coastal and riverine flood-risk evaluation considers potential consequences in
a more quantitative fashion. It looks not just at
the number of people exposed or expected to be displaced as the result of an event but reviews expected economic costs resulting from mental stress and anxiety as well as lost productivity. Shelter needs expected for each evaluated event
in each sea level rise scenario have been calculated based on the following factors:26
◦ Expected flood depths within occupied structures
◦ Population residing in those structures
◦ The share of the current population within a
given area that is identified as low to moderate income or as older adults
Mental stress and anxiety calculations are based on the percent share of the impacted population expected to seek mental health treatment as a result of disruption caused by direct physical flood impacts to the structures within which they reside,
as well as the expected costs of such treatment. Lost productivity28 refers to lost work productivity as a result of mental stress and anxiety alone, and it is calculated based on expected earnings lost over time as a result of decreased work productivity or performance. Both figures only consider impacts for the 30-month period following a flood event and are considered highly conservative (low estimates), particularly given that results only
26 Methodology is detailed in the Appendix and follows process described in FEMA’s Hazus Flood Technical Manual 2.1. Source: “Hazus Flood Technical Manual.” Federal Emergency Management Agency. Hazushtt
27 See Appendix for detailed methodology and sources.
28 Both mental stress and anxiety and lost productivity are calculated using FEMA methodologies approved for benefit-cost analyses to federal funding for mitigation projects. See Appendix for detailed methodology and sources. Source: “Final Sustainability Benefits Methodology Report.” Federal Emergency Management Agency. August 23, 2012. /pii/S22124291400119
29 Values are considered conservative as they only incorporate the percent of the population expected to seek treatment, as opposed to the entire population expected to experience mental stress and anxiety. Further, only near-term effects are evaluated. Refer to the Appendix for a more detailed description of the approach.
24 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 25
27

 DEPTH DAMAGE FUNCTIONS IN PRACTICE
Example Adapted from FEMA’s Benefit Cost Analysis Training Unit 337
  Consequences of impact from heat- and stormwater-related flood hazards are assessed more qualitatively based on structure types and occupancies, as well as lessons learned. For example, certain structures are more likely to experience stress to their power supply as a result of excessive heat.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Infrastructure refers to facilities and assets that provide a public service to the City of Boston and its population. Infrastructure may be publicly or privately owned and operated and include the following, for example:
◦ Critical facilities, such as water treatment facilities and generating plants
◦ Transportation infrastructure, such as roads, bridges, and public transportation
◦ Essential facilities, such as hospitals and emergency operations centers
◦ Public facilities, such as schools and civic structures
Climate Ready Boston developed a detailed
asset inventory to capture infrastructure and to supplement the general building stock described above. This combined inventory was based on over 130 separate datasets from a variety of sources (see Appendix for more detail). This dataset was merged with the general building stock, where appropriate, in order to fill in data gaps and confirm property uses. Members of the Infrastructure Advisory Group (IAG) supported the identification of infrastructure assets, as well as relationships and interdependencies between different assets and entities, individual and system vulnerabilities, and existing resiliency measures in place or planned.
The infrastructure analysis for stormwater
and coastal and riverine flooding presents exposure statistics accompanied by largely qualitative descriptions of potential impacts that may result from service interruptions, including interdependencies between different infrastructure networks. Due variably to data limitations or privacy and security concerns, the Vulnerability Assessment does not include site-
specific information necessary to individually assess infrastructure vulnerability.38 Only direct physical damages to buildings have been captured for coastal and riverine flood hazard using
the method explained above in the Buildings section, with potential impacts to service and
line routes (such as transportation, pipelines, electrical lines) described qualitatively.39 Heat hazard vulnerability is assessed qualitatively
and refers predominantly to impacts on energy infrastructure as well as public and other facilities without air conditioning or that may house vulnerable populations (such as nursing homes
or public housing).
While the focus of this analysis is on impacts to Boston’s infrastructure, much infrastructure is systemic in nature and will have broader regional impacts that need to be considered in future planning efforts. Similarly, the impacts of regional infrastructure on Boston’s people and economy should be considered in future efforts.
38 At a minimum, site-specific information needed to make conclusions about asset or system vulnerability include the critical flood elevation and any mitigation or emergency protection measures in place.
39 It should be noted that service loss can be quantified.
26 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
It should be noted that calculations typically involve the 10 percent, 2 percent,
37
1 percent, and 0.2 percent annual chance events. Climate Ready Boston has substituted the 0.2 percent annual chance event with the 0.1 percent annual chance event in order to understand impacts at that severity of storm. As such, damage-cost calculations may be conservative compared to if the 0.2 percent annual chance had been incorporated.
 SUPPORT FROM INFRASTRUCTURE
AND COMMUNITY LEADERS
Infrastructure and community stakeholders supported the development of the Vulnerability Assessment and climate resilience initiatives through participation in the IAG and the Community Climate Resilience Focus Groups.
Infrastructure Advisory Group: IAG members included representatives from the following:
• Utility companies
• Hospitals, including Medical and Scientific Community Organization, Inc. (MASCO)
• Universities
• Public agencies, such as the Massachusetts Port Authority (Massport), MassDOT, Boston Housing Authority, and the Boston Water and Sewer Commission.
• City agencies such as the Department of Public Works (DPW), the Parks and Recreation Department (BPRD), the Boston Transportation Department (BTD), the Boston Conservation Commission, the Boston Public Health Commission, and the Commission for Elderly Affairs
Through a series of group planning discussions and workshops, IAG members supported the process by providing insight on the greater Boston area infrastructure (e.g., transportation, utilities, buildings, environmental and recreational assets, public housing, and schools) and key interdependencies between different types of infrastructure. Cascading impacts of interruption in the transportation network rose as a major concern across IAG members from all sectors.
Community Climate Resiliency Focus Group: Focus group members included representatives from the following:
• Community and neighborhood development corporations (e.g., the Neighborhood of Affordable Housing [NOAH])
• Government agencies and commissions (i.e., the Boston Public Health Commission] and the Boston Elderly Commission)
• 100 Resilient Cities Steering Committee and Working Group (led by City of Boston Chief Resilience Officer Dr. Atyia Martin)
Goals included providing input to the Vulnerability Assessment and Climate Resilience Initiatives and providing an opportunity for groups to learn from one another. Discussions focused on community infrastructure, ongoing resilience work, and opportunities for partnerships on implementation of community initiatives. Key findings included the importance of sensitivity around mapping efforts and the need to be equitable when prioritizing climate readiness solutions.
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 27

 CALCULATING BUSINESS INTERRUPTION CONSEQUENCES
 LOSS CATEGORY
 LOSSES CONSIDERED
 DESCRIPTION
 BUSINESS INTERRUPTION
ECONOMY
• Loss of Employment
• Output Loss
Business interruption is associated income lost as
a result of an event that disrupts the operations of the business or the removal of a piece of real estate, both rental and sale properties, from the market as a result of disaster impacts.
REPORTING OF EXPECTED LOSSES AS
A RESULT OF COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOODING
All loss estimations are reported by imposing future climate conditions on the present population and built environment. Neither population nor development have been projected into the future.
Loss estimations for people, property, and the economy presented in this assessment are reported both as one-time costs by event in total, by loss category, and as an annualized value for each sea level rise condition.42 Annualized values represent the total of the product of single losses expected for each projected sea level rise condition and
its chance of occurring in any given year.43 This method facilitates resiliency planning by allowing for comparison across areas and events, as well as expected losses in each sea level rise scenario.
 Impacts to people, structures, and infrastructure as a result of climate hazards can also disrupt the broader Boston economy. Severe impacts can have regional, national, and even international consequences. As a result, Climate Ready Boston has sought to quantitatively capture
the potential impacts of business interruption within Boston as a result of coastal and riverine flooding, although results are conservative (low estimates). Calculations use a combination of expected building restoration times sourced by FEMA, output and employment values by zip code for Suffolk County from 2014 (most recent available data), and input output modeling through IMPLAN.40 Only loss impacts within the city are considered, and restoration times used
to determine business interruption assume only floors of the structure that are directly impacted experience disruption. It further assumes that all businesses will eventually reopen and that all real estate will return to value production. It reality, almost 40 percent of small businesses never reopen following a disaster.41
Exposure and consequences to the city’s economy as a result of heat- or stormwater-related flood hazard is explored qualitatively.
40 Detailed methodology provided in the Appendix.
41 Source: “National Flood Insurance Program: Protecting Your Business.” Federal Emergency Management Agency. http://www.fema.gov/protecting-your-businesses.
42 Annualized values consider four of the five frequencies considered in this Vulnerability Assessment, including the 10 percent, 2 percent, 1 percent, and 0.1 percent annual chance flood. Direct damages for each of the flood frequencies for one sea level rise condition were multiplied by their percent chance of occurrence and then added together to yield the annualized value for one sea level rise condition. Thus annualized values do not consider frequent flood events such as high tides or storms with a chance of occurrence greater than 10 percent.
43 Annualized losses should not be interpreted as the losses expected annually. Refer to the Appendix for a more detailed description of the approach taken to evaluate damage factors.
28 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 PROBABILITY TIMES CONSEQUENCE
Annualizing losses is one method used to “normalize” results of an evaluation (or even historical losses) in order to communicate risk. In fact, the definition of “risk” is often communicated
as “probability times consequence”; this is exactly how annualized losses are calculated. Annualized losses can be
used to compare the impacts of different events across time
for mitigation-planning purposes and can even be used to compare the effects of entirely different hazards (so long as a probability of impact and costs of such impact can be derived). Expected relocation costs within the city as a result of 9 inches
of sea level rise (near-term sea level rise scenario) can be used to illustrate this point:
By annualizing the losses of this event, it becomes apparent
that the risk (probability times consequence) associated with the 10 percent annual chance event is higher than the lowest probability event evaluated, despite the fact that one-time event costs for the 10 percent chance are expected to be significantly lower. This information informs the resiliency planner that, in combination with other factors, properties within the 10 percent annual chance flood area should perhaps be prioritized for action prior to those at risk only to lower-probability events.44
44 Risk prioritization should take into consideration a variety of factors.
ANNUALIZATION OF ESTIMATED RELOCATION COSTS FOR THE 9-INCH SEA LEVEL RISE SCENARIO
 EVENT
ONE-TIME EVENT CONSEQUENCES
PROBABILITY
percent annual chance
ANNUALIZED
probability x consequence
 10%
high probability
 $12,000,000
 10%
 $1,200,000
 2%
 30,500,000
 2%
 $600,000
 1%
lower probability
  $35,600,000
  1%
  $400,000
 0.1%
very low probability
 $155,200,000
 0.1%
 $200,000
 Total
cannot be calculated
-
$2,400,000
   The one-time economic consequences are larger for lower probability storms.
When the frequency of occurrence is considered, the total economic cost of high probability events is significantly higher. These events have a lower cost each time they occur, but occur much more frequently.
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 29

       OLDER ADULTS CHILDREN PEOPLE OF COLOR PEOPLE WITH LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY PEOPLE WITH LOW-TO NO-INCOME PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES CASES OF MEDICAL ILLNESS
SOCIAL VULNERABILITY
CONCENTRATIONS OF SOCIALLY VULNERABLE POPULATIONS45
104,659
KEY VULNERABILITIES BY POPULATION GROUP
OLDER ADULTS
Older adults (those over age 65) have physical vulnerabilities in a climate event; they suffer
from higher rates of medical illness than the rest
of the population and can have some functional limitations in an evacuation scenario, as well as when preparing for and recovering from a disaster. Furthermore, older adults are physically more vulnerable to the impacts of extreme heat. Beyond the physical risk, older adults are more likely
to be socially isolated. Without an appropriate support network, an initially small risk could be exacerbated if an older adult is not able to get help.
CHILDREN
Families with children require additional resources in a climate event. When school is cancelled, parents need alternative childcare options, which can mean missing work. Children are especially vulnerable to extreme heat and stress following a natural disaster.
Social vulnerability is defined as the disproportionate susceptibility of some social groups to the impacts of hazards, including death, injury, loss, or disruption of livelihood.
         63,187
327,284
239,246
176,059 70,701
236,938
30 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 31
PEOPLE OF COLOR
response personnel. If residents are more socially isolated, they may be less likely to hear about upcoming events. Finally, immigrants, especially ones who are undocumented, may be reluctant to use government services out of fear of deportation or general distrust of the government or emergency personnel.
PEOPLE WITH LOW-TO NO-INCOME
A lack of financial resources impacts a household’s ability to prepare for a disaster event and to support friends and neighborhoods. For example, residents without televisions, computers, or data- driven mobile phones may face challenges getting news about hazards or recovery resources. Renters may have trouble finding and paying deposits for replacement housing if their residence is impacted by flooding. Homeowners may be less able to afford insurance that will cover flood damage. Having low or no income can create difficulty evacuating in a disaster event because of a higher reliance on public transportation. If unable to evacuate, residents may be more at risk without supplies to stay in their homes for an extended
period of time. Low- and no-income residents can also be more vulnerable to hot weather if running air conditioning or fans puts utility costs out of reach.
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
People with disabilities are among the most vulnerable in an emergency; they sustain disproportionate rates of illness, injury, and death in disaster events.46 People with disabilities can
find it difficult to adequately prepare for a disaster event, including moving to a safer place. They are more likely to be left behind or abandoned during evacuations. Rescue and relief resources—like emergency transportation or shelters, for example— may not be universally accessible. Research has revealed a historic pattern of discrimination against people with disabilities in times of resource scarcity, like after a major storm and flood.
45 Socially vulnerable populations were mapped by number of people per land acre in each census tract in the City of Boston. Census tracts whose concentrations of vulnerable populations in each group fall in the top quartile (25 percent) of census tracts are highlighted in the series of maps.
46 For example, research indicates the mortality rate among people with disabilities was twice that of the rest of the population during the 2011 Japan earthquake and tsunami.
People of color make up a majority (53 percent)
of Boston’s population. People of color are more likely to fall into multiple vulnerable groups as well. People of color statistically have lower levels of income and higher levels of poverty than the population at large. People of color, many of whom also have limited English proficiency, may not
have ready access in their primary language to information about the dangers of extreme heat or about cooling center resources. This risk to extreme heat can be compounded by the fact that people of color often live in more densely populated urban areas that are at higher risk for heat exposure due to the urban heat island effect.
PEOPLE WITH LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY
Without adequate English skills, residents can miss crucial information on how to prepare
for hazards. Cultural practices for information sharing, for example, may focus on word-of-mouth communication. In a flood event, residents can also face challenges communicating with emergency
Numbers show a representation of citywide populations or cases.

 SOCIALLY VULNERABLE GROUPS BY NEIGHBORHOOD
 OLDER ADULTS # %
#
%
CHILDREN
PEOPLE OF COLOR # %
PEOPLE WITH LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY47
LOW-TO NO-INCOME
# %
#
%
DISABILITY
MEDICAL ILLNESS48 # %
 COMMUNITY
 TOTAL POPULATION
 #
 %
      Allston/ Brighton
Back Bay/ Beacon Hill
Charlestown
Dorchester
Downtown
East Boston
Fenway/ Kenmore
75,000
22,600
16,400
87,400
30,000
40,500
44,300
6,100 2,800 1,800 8,500 4,100 4,100 2,100
8% 12% 11% 10% 14% 10%
4,600 6% 25,400 1,900 8% 3,600 3,300 20% 4,000 21,000 24% 62,500 2,000 7% 9,400 8,700 21% 25,500
34% 16% 24% 72% 31% 63% 33%
9,700 13% 21,000
600 3% 2,600
1,600 10% 4,200
35,100 40% 26,600
4,000 13% 6,800
17,400 43% 13,700
3,700 8% 11,200
28% 11% 25% 30% 23% 34% 25%
6,200 8% 29,200 n/a 1,000 5% 9,500 n/a 1,500 9% 6,500 n/a
                  5% 600 1% 14,400
12,400 2,600 5,200 2,700
14% 31,800 9% 12,400 13% 14,800 6% 16,000
36% n/a n/a n/a
   HarborIslands - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - -
   Hyde Park
Jamaica Plain
Mattapan
Roslindale
Roxbury
South Boston
South End
West Roxbury
32,300
42,100
33,700
37,700
71,600
31,800
38,600
30,400
4,200 4,100 3,900 3,800 5,800 3,200 3,300 5,400
13% 7,000 22% 23,200 10% 6,300 15% 19,200 11% 9,600 29% 32,100 10% 7,100 19% 16,700
8% 16,700 23% 59,200 10% 4,900 15% 7,100
9% 4,900 13% 16,500 18% 6,100 20% 8,100
72% 46% 95% 44% 83% 22% 43% 27%
4,600 14% 5,700
4,900 12% 14,500
5,800 17% 11,900
5,400 14% 6,800
11,400 16% 27,700
2,600 8% 8,200
5,800 15% 11,600
3,000 10% 3,500
18% 34% 35% 18% 39% 26% 30% 11%
3,800 4,200 6,000 4,100 10,400 3,000 4,300 3,000
12% 12,500 10% 16,400 18% 12,500 11% 12,500 15% 24,000
9% 13,500 11% 12,800 10% 12,400
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
                      Boston Total
  634,400
 63,200 10%
104,700 17%
327,300 52%
 98,200
   176,100 28%
70,700 11%
236,900 37%
Percent of Boston
100%
15%
       CASES OF MEDICAL ILLNESS
NEIGHBORHOOD VULNERABILITY AND CONNECTIVITY
The Vulnerability Assessment analyzes personal characteristics (like income or race) that heighten vulnerability in a climate event and also considers vulnerabilities that occur at a neighborhood
scale. If a neighborhood has less access to a certain resource, its residents can be even more vulnerable. Neighborhoods need redundancy in their resource networks in the same way that individuals do.
Communities with overlapping vulnerabilities are at greater risk. Risk is increased even further in the context of chronically under-resourced neighborhoods.
Neighborhood connectivity is a significant factor in community resilience. Neighborhoods that are less well served by public transit or with fewer
road connections overall are more vulnerable in a climate event. If a neighborhood only has one bus or subway line connecting it to the transportation system, residents who depend on transit can
more easily be cut off from their employment or healthcare. The GoBoston 2030 planning effort is evaluating and planning for Boston’s neighborhood connectivity.
Neighborhood connectivity spans more than just transportation access; connections between people also create more resilient communities. Strong community organizations reduce risk from social isolation and connect residents to resources and information regarding climate change impacts. Limited access to resources at a neighborhood scale can also exacerbate social vulnerability. East Boston, for example, has high concentrations of medical illness but no hospitals. If the tunnels and bridges became inaccessible in a flood event, those in need of acute medical care could be less able to access it;
access to much-needed medications has historically been an issue in large coastal flood events.
The daily stresses socially vulnerable residents face can also make recovery and adaptation more difficult. For example, residents living in an area without a grocery store may have less access to healthy food. In such areas, classified as “food deserts,” residents may face challenges to eating healthily on a daily basis as well as acquiring adequate food supplies for sheltering in place
in a climate event. Boston’s food deserts include the Seaport, Roslindale, East Boston, Roxbury, and West Roxbury.49
47 “People with limited English proficiency” = ACS survey respondents who indicated they speak English less than “very well.”
48 Health data at the local level in Massachusetts not available beyond zip codes. EASI modeled the health statistics for the U.S. population based upon age, sex, and race probabilities using U.S. Census Bureau data. The probabilities are modeled against the census and current-year and five-year forecasts. “Medical illness” is the sum of asthma in children, asthma in adults, heart disease, emphysema, bronchitis, cancer, diabetes, kidney disease, and liver disease. A limitation is that these numbers may be over- counted as the result of people potentially having more than one medical illness. These statistics reflect the number of incidences of each illness, not the number of residents. Neighborhood percentages are not available due to potential for over-counting.
49 Food deserts are areas located greater than one mile away from a grocery store. Source: “Food Access Research Atlas.” USDA Economic Research Service.
Symptoms of existing medical illnesses are often exacerbated by hot temperatures. For example, heat can trigger asthma attacks or increase already high blood pressure due to the stress of high temperatures put on the body. Climate events can interrupt access to normal sources of healthcare and even life-sustaining medication. Special planning is required for people experiencing medical illness. For example, people dependent on dialysis will have different evacuation and care needs than other Boston residents in a climate event.
32 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 33

      EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCE ANALYSIS
OVERVIEW
The citywide findings of the Vulnerability Assessment are summarized within this section. Based on the hazard data and methodologies previously discussed, the exposures and consequences of all three hazards are presented and compared by neighborhood. The findings
for each hazard are organized based on expected impacts to people, buildings, infrastructure,
and the economy. Where possible, quantitative analyses were conducted, though due to limitations in the available data, some findings only include a qualitative assessment of exposure.
This section includes analyses of the following:
1. Extreme Heat: Public health and other impacts of rising temperatures
2. Stormwater Flooding: Quantitative and qualitative impacts on people, buildings, infrastructure, and economy
3. Coastal and Riverine Flooding: Quantitative and qualitative impacts on people, buildings, infrastructure, and economy
CHILDREN AND HEAT ISLAND EXPOSURE
EXTREME HEAT
PEOPLE
Heat impacts are some of the most well- understood, measurable, and preventable impacts of climate change on human health.
Negative health impacts often accompany extreme heat. These consequences may include direct loss of life, increases in respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, and challenges to mental health. Weather and climate can also influence health stressors, such as air pollution and vector-borne diseases. Given the steady rise in temperatures that has been occurring in Boston—1.8 degrees Fahrenheit since 1970 (see Climate Projection Consensus within
this report)—it is probable that corresponding health risks will become an even greater challenge in the future. Climate Ready Boston examined current climate health risks faced by Boston and considered how climate change may worsen these risks. The assessment draws on related assessments completed over the past several years.
While some health impact pathways are rather direct—such as the immediate consequences of
OLDER ADULTS AND HEAT ISLAND EXPOSURE
high temperature or severe storms—most operate through complex systems involving urban land use, infrastructure, ecology, and other systems. Compromised infrastructure can magnify health vulnerabilities. For example, air conditioning requires reliable delivery of electricity, which, in turn, depends on the integrity of the electrical grid system and associated power-generating facilities. Access to healthcare services depends on a functioning transportation system. Thus, understanding the impact that future extreme weather events may have on health in Boston requires considerations of the vulnerabilities of critical infrastructure systems.
Heat extremes can cause death in addition to exacerbating chronic health conditions and disease. Emergency room visits and hospital admissions increase during heat waves. Consequences of heat are some of the most well-understood, measurable, and preventable impacts of climate change on human health. While everyone is vulnerable
when temperatures spike, some members of
the population are particularly vulnerable, including older adults (especially if living alone), the very young, low- and no-income residents,
MEDICAL ILLNESS AND HEAT ISLAND EXPOSURE
The maps above show both daytime and nighttime heat islands as measured by changes in land surface temperature across the City of Boston. The dots help show concentrations of populations vulnerable to heat.
Some members of the population are particularly at risk when temperatures spike, including older adults, the very young, outdoor workers, and those with pre-existing health conditions.
34 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 35

outdoor workers, and those with preexisting chronic diseases.50 In addition to these individual characteristics, research shows that living in neighborhoods with less tree canopy leads to greater risk.51
The link between less tree canopy and warmer temperatures in urban neighborhoods is part of the “heat island effect.” The concept of the heat island effect refers to the higher temperatures observed
in city centers as compared with surrounding regions; these higher temperatures are particularly hazardous at nighttime, when it is important for the body to cool off.
Most of the scientific evidence on the health effects of heat has focused on increases in daily death counts during and following extreme heat events. Even a single day of high temperatures may increase death rates, but a sequence of hot days, as in the case of a heat wave, brings even more risk. Extremes of heat will become more severe and more prolonged and extend into the spring and fall seasons, leading to greater exposures of vulnerable people. This exposure may be exacerbated given the aging of the population.
Morbidity and mortality effects of heat may be especially severe if the power goes out during an extreme heat event. Power failures are more likely during heat waves due to the increased demand for electric power for air conditioning, as well as the added stress of the heat on mechanical and electrical assets. At the same time, air conditioning provides important protection from exposure to extreme heat, especially for those who are most vulnerable. The loss of power during extreme events, which may be more likely with climate change, could significantly amplify heat-related health impacts in the future.
50 Source: Kinney et al., “Approaches for Estimating Effects of Climate Change on Heat-Related Deaths: Challenges and Opportunities.” Environmental Science and Policy 11, 2008. Note: data for medically ill people double-counts people with multiple illnesses and thus represents total cases of medical illness of various types as opposed to a total number of people.
51 Source: Madrigano et al., “A Case-Only Study of Vulnerability to Heat Wave–Related Mortality in New York City (2000–2011).” Environmental Health Perspectives 123, no. 7. July 2015.
36 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Researchers at Columbia University examined
the potential future health impacts from warming temperatures by linking together future climate projections with information on the health responses that occur in a city when temperatures increase.52 The historical relationship53 between heat and deaths in the summer in Suffolk County, Massachusetts,54 shows that death rates increased significantly with high temperatures. The analysis projected future health impacts for future temperatures in the 2020s, 2050s, and 2080s.
Since climate change will be affected by greenhouse gas emissions now and into the future, and projected emissions are uncertain, moderate upper- and lower-bound greenhouse gas projections were used to drive the climate models.55 The following figure shows annual heat-related mortality rates for Boston.
MORTALITY RATE RELATIVE RISK BY TEMPERATURE
In the baseline period (1985–2016), heat-related mortality rates were estimated to be 2.9 per 100,000 people in Boston. During the 2020s, median heat- related mortality rates for the low and high GHG emission scenario are expected to be 5.9 and 6.5 per 100,000, respectively.56 By the 2050s, Boston could experience median mortality rates of 8.8
and 11.7 per 100,000, for the low and high scenarios, respectively. By the 2080s, the median heat-related mortality rates will increase to 10.5 and 19.3
per 100,000.
Air pollution in Boston is negatively impacted by rising average temperatures.
Boston currently faces challenges in keeping levels of air pollution below health-based standards, especially for ozone and fine particulate matter (PM2.5). Boston’s challenges with these pollutants
are also related to its position downwind of much of the urban northeast corridor, along with power plants and factories throughout the mid-western states.
Ozone is a strong oxidant gas that occurs at high levels during the warm half of the year and is the major contributor to urban smog. Ozone exacerbates respiratory illnesses like asthma and has also been linked with premature deaths in cities. PM2.5 measures the quantity of tiny, invisible particles suspended in the air due
to emissions from a wide variety of sources. Combustion of fossil fuels (e.g., from cars, trucks, furnaces, or power plants) produces large amounts of toxic PM2.5 emissions. PM2.5 exposure over the long term contributes to the development of heart and lung diseases, similar to cigarette smoking.
  PROJECTED ANNUAL HEAT-RELATED DEATHS PER 100,000 POPULATION
  The figure shows the way that historical death rates from the baseline period of 1985–2006 changed as a function of temperature. A relative risk of 2.0, for example, would indicate that the heat-related mortality rate for a day of that temperature would be twice as high as a normal (1.0) day.
52 Source: Petkova et al., “Projected Heat-Related Mortality in the U.S. Urban Northeast.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2013. doi: 10.3390/ijerph10126734.
53 Using daily data from 1985 to 2006.
54 Suffolk County includes the cities of Boston, Revere, Chelsea, and Winthrop.
55 Values derived from a combination of multiple climate studies. See the Climate Projection Summary in this report for more information.
56 The high-emissions scenario assumes the continuation of business as usual (no reduction in greenhouse gas emissions).
Mortality rates due to extreme heat are expected to triple with the impacts of climate change in Boston.
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 37
Baseline (1985–2016) and projected future annual heat- related mortality rates for Boston according to 33 global climate models and two greenhouse gas scenarios.

 2001
2014
CHANGES IN LYME DISEASE CASE REPORT DISTRIBUTION
Maps show the reported cases of Lyme disease in 2001
in 2014 for the areas of the country where lyme disease is most common (the Northeast and Upper Midwest). Both the distribution and the numbers of cases have increased. (Figure source: adapted from CDC 2015)
Studies suggest that climate change alone (absent changes in pollution-precursor emissions) could lead to higher concentrations of air pollution in the northeastern United States, especially for ozone, leading to increasing health risks. Holding emissions constant, climate changes could worsen air quality, and health, by up to 5 percent by mid- century.57 By reducing emissions from fossil fuel combustion, we can achieve benefits both for health and for climate.
Changes in average temperatures can also impact transmission of vector-borne diseases.
Mosquitoes and the diseases they carry are
highly sensitive to weather phenomena such as temperature, rainfall, and humidity. For example, rain provides still water for mosquitoes to breed, while drought conditions decrease survival; rising temperatures can enhance the rates of larval development, adult feeding behavior, and pathogen development within the mosquito. Climate change and associated warmer, wetter conditions may increase the risk of vector-borne disease infection, including Lyme disease. Of particular concern are potential future impacts related to the diseases carried by the mosquito Aedes albopictus, which is present in the northeastern United States but has not thrived to date because of the constraining influence of cold winters. This mosquito transmits dengue fever and chikungunya and may also carry Zika virus.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Boston’s transportation infrastructure could be at risk from increased frequency, duration, and intensity of heat waves.
High temperatures can cause steel railroad tracks to expand. The expansion causes stress to ties, ballasts, and rail anchors that keep the tracks fixed
57 Source: Knowlton, Kim et al. “Assessing Ozone-Related Health Impacts under a Changing Climate.” Environmental Health Perspectives 112 (15): 1557–1563. 2004. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1247621/.
to the ground. Under enough force of expansion, tracks will buckle in an impact sometimes called
a “sunk kink.” More frequent and severe heat waves may require track repairs or speed restrictions to avoid derailments. Many rail networks require trains to reduce their speed in temperatures over 90 degrees. With more annual days over 90 expected in the future, the efficiency of the rail system in the city and in the Northeast Corridor could be impacted.
Thermal expansion can also occur in asphalt
and concrete roads in hot temperatures, causing roads to buckle. Road buckling is more common in concrete than in asphalt since it is a less flexible material. Buckling is most common in the early summer months when there is subsurface moisture. Road buckling is difficult to predict and difficult to prepare for aside from cautioning drivers to be aware of the road condition and having repair crews ready. Some bridges and railroad tracks are constructed with expansion joints designed to safely absorb heat-induced expansion of construction materials without
any cracking or buckling. Control joints, on the other hand—much less expensive than expansion joints—are strategic cuts in concrete used to allow any cracking from thermal expansion to occur in a controlled fashion for predictability and ease of repair.58
Finally, regular road upkeep can be negatively impacted by construction crews’ ability to work safely outdoors to maintain roads in the hotter summer months.59 In Boston, this challenge could be somewhat mitigated by workers being able to work longer into the winter months.
Increased average temperatures will also impact natural systems and green infrastructure in Boston. Natural systems—including the urban
58 Source: “The Potential Impacts of Climate Change on U.S. Transportation.” Transportation Research Board Special Report 290. National Research Council (NRC). 2008.
59 Source: “Workers at Risk from Excessive Heat.” Occupational Safety and Health Administration. United States Department of Labor.
tree canopy, public parks and open space, and private and commercial green space—play a significant role in mitigating extreme heat events. These systems can also suffer from chronic stress related to increased average temperatures, drought, and abnormally warm winter seasons.
While tree species near the southern end of their native range and those which are intolerant of urban conditions will be particularly stressed, increased temperatures, mild winters, and dramatic temperature fluctuations may disrupt the seasonal cycles of many species. This would potentially lead to damage or death. These stressors can also leave urban forests particularly vulnerable to pest and pathogens that more freely proliferate with reduced frost depth and increased frost-free days.
Heat-related vulnerabilities to the urban tree canopy and natural systems are a compounding issue. As rising temperatures lead to a potential increase in tree mortality, any loss of canopy coverage or green space will only contribute to the urban heat island effect, reduced air quality, increased stormwater runoff, and decreased quality of life.
  In extreme heat, the air-conditioned built environment is where the city takes shelter, but our built environment also faces impacts from heat. Though the exact impacts of increased temperatures and increasing frequency, duration, and intensity
of heat waves on energy use in Boston are not quantified in this report, higher average temperatures will increase energy use in all building categories. Air conditioning is energy intensive; if the city’s energy infrastructure does not keep pace with increasing demand (especially a more sudden spike in energy use as a result of a heat wave), then brownouts or blackouts are probable. Furthermore, this increased energy usage can strain the individual building infrastructure of some of Boston’s aging building stock that may not have adequate electrical capacity for sufficient cooling.
38 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 39

 LAND AREA EXPOSED TO FREQUENT STORMWATER FLOODING UNDER VARYING CLIMATE CONDITIONS
   NEIGHBORHOOD
TOTAL AREA ACRES
2030S–2050S
2050S–2100S
2070S OR LATER
NEIGHBORHOOD
2030S–2050S
2050S–2100S
2070S OR LATER
West Roxbury
 3,350
 240
 240
 260
 West Roxbury
 7%
 7%
 8%
 Allston/Brighton
 2,940
 200
 200
 220
 Allston/Brighton
 7%
 7%
 8%
 Dorchester
 3,780
 330
 360
 410
 Dorchester
 9%
 10%
 11%
             East Boston
Jamaica Plain
Hyde Park
Roslindale
Roxbury
Mattapan
South Boston Charlestown
Fenway/Kenmore
Downtown
Back Bay/Beacon Hill
Harbor Islands
3,430
2,260
3,260
2,250
2,770
1,560
1,940 870
620
770
460
820
180
170
170
170
170
130
120 60
50
40
30
90
NEIGHBORHOOD ACRES FLOODED
210
180
170
170
170
130
150 60
50
40
30
100
Top Three Affected by Acres in the Near Term
STORMWATER FLOODING
260
190
180
180
180
140
190 70
60
50
30
120
East Boston
Jamaica Plain
Hyde Park
Roslindale
Roxbury
Mattapan
South Boston Charlestown
Fenway/Kenmore
Downtown
Back Bay/Beacon Hill
Harbor Islands
PERCENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD FLOODED
5% 6% 8%
8% 8% 9%
5% 5% 6%
7% 7% 8%
6% 6% 7%
8% 8% 9%
6% 8% 10% 7% 7% 8%
8% 8% 9%
5% 6% 7%
6% 6% 7%
11% 12% 15%
All figures presented based on current available land. Any change to the landscape from present conditions, such as subsidence or land loss as a result of sea level rise, are not taken into consideration.
                   South End
  640
  70
  90
  160
  South End
  11%
  14%
  26%
                    Boston Total
 31,720
 2,200
 2,350
 2,720
 Boston Total
 7%
 7%
 9%
       Top Affected by Percentage in the Near Term
 The Wastewater Facilities Study completed by BWSC has greatly improved understanding of stormwater flood risk in Boston.
Data and insight provided by BWSC has
been instrumental in the completion of the Vulnerability Assessment and the development of the resilience initiatives. As discussed in the Process Overview above, the BWSC’s analysis of current and future flooding for 10-year, 24- hour rainfall events has provided a foundation for this Vulnerability Assessment. Though the BWSC stormwater flooding exposure data are not specific enough to approximate structural damage or other direct consequences, the data provide ample details to assess areas impacted by frequent (10-year, 24-hour) and nuisance flooding. Additionally, BWSC has been an active partner through the Climate Ready Boston process, providing insights necessary to develop impactful resilience initiatives.
40 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 41
Without improvements, the existing stormwater system will not be capable of conveying a 10-year, 24-hour rainfall event, causing untreated stormwater runoff to pond in the streets. Further, the system currently struggles to convey the current 10-year, 24-hour rainfall event.
By mid-century, 7 percent of the total land area in the city could be exposed to stormwater flooding for the 10-year, 24-hour event, with that percentage increasing to 9 percent by the end of the century.60 West Roxbury, Allston, Brighton, East Boston, and South Dorchester have the largest areas of land expected to be affected by stormwater flooding, while the South End and South Boston can expect
60 Land areas are based on the three 10-year, 24-hour stormwater flood extents developed by BWSC and outlined in the Process Overview section. Sea level rise is accounted for in future climate conditions.
to see the greatest increase in land area exposed to stormwater flooding as sea levels rise and precipitation events become more extreme. Sea level rise exacerbates stormwater flooding issues by preventing outflow or even causing backflow, resulting in backup of water attempting to flow toward lower ground.
Every neighborhood in Boston will be exposed to frequent stormwater flooding.
Throughout every neighborhood in the city, there are multiple areas at risk of stormwater flooding for the 10-year, 24-hour design storm, ranging in size from hundreds of square feet along streets
to multiple city blocks. The largest areas of stormwater flooding generally are concentrated at low points and in areas with poor hydraulic conveyance or insufficient storage capacity. Key areas include along the coast, where outfalls may be unable to discharge (sea level rise will
exacerbate such conditions), transportation corridors with impervious surfaces where water cannot percolate, and designed drainage areas that may be overwhelmed. In total, these flooded areas impact large portions of neighborhoods; 5 percent or more of the land area in each of Boston’s 17 neighborhoods will be exposed to flooding from a 10-year, 24-hour storm as early as the 2030s.
Direct exposure to stormwater flooding increases steadily over time due to climate change.
This trend is expected for frequent hazards like the 10-year, 24-hour storm and may not be consistent for other, more severe events. When planning ways to address stormwater flooding, the long-term
rate of expected change in stormwater flooding (including potential planned system upgrades) is important for implementation timing.

 FLOODING FROM 10-YEAR, 24-HOUR STORM WITH VARYING CLIMATE CONDITIONS
     LAND AREA EXPOSED TO CHRONIC STORMWATER FLOODING
  42 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Climate Vulnerability Assessment 43
Near term (2030s-2050s) Mid term (2050s-2100s) Late term (2070s onwards) Major Roads
Near term Mid term Late term (2030s–2050s) (2050s-2100s) (2070s onwards)

Future frequent stormwater flooding will require gray and green infrastructure investments.
Even with some improvements to the existing stormwater system, untreated runoff is expected to pond. According to the BWSC Wastewater Facilities Study, adding storage to the conveyance systems, making major upgrades in individual pump station capacities, or combinations of these alternatives will improve hydraulics but may not be able to mitigate stormwater flooding in the future caused by climate change. Further analyses are necessary to examine the projected severity of ponding for future climate projections after improvements are made to the stormwater system.
PEOPLE
Over 85,000 people61 currently live in areas expected to be directly exposed to frequent stormwater flooding by the end of the century.
Of the existing structures exposed to expected stormwater flooding, 80 percent are either residential or mixed-use buildings, impacting
tens of thousands of residents and workers in the exposed buildings and many more that use nearby streets and open spaces that would be flooded.
Stormwater flooding can lower indoor air quality and worsen asthma symptoms.
Because people spend at least 90 percent
of their time indoors, the quality of the air indoors heavily affects health status. Moisture and air humidity as well as the dampness of building materials can significantly impact indoor air quality.
Any residential or commercial structures that experience flooding will face potential long-term challenges related to mold growth and resulting respiratory problems. This risk is exacerbated in
61 Current population residing in areas expected to be exposed. The population has not been projected into the future.
44 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
buildings that are adjacent to poorly drained soils, have poorly sealed exterior windows and roofs, or use forced hot air, which can become a conveyor of air from damp basement areas.
Some socially vulnerable populations may face significant challenges with nuisance flooding.
The presence of residential buildings in flooded areas likely translates to nuisance flooding, which rarely damages property but impacts road access and mobility. Nuisance flooding affects quality of life for people in general, with a higher probability of impacting socially vulnerable populations. Flooded sidewalks, for example, can especially impact someone in a wheelchair or someone who has difficulty walking, making it more difficult to get to a bus stop, to work, to a shop for groceries, or to a healthcare appointment. Flooded roads and sidewalks also disrupt neighborhood connectivity and isolate residents from one another, contributing to social isolation. For populations burdened with significant stresses and fewer resource redundancies, this hazard will cause disproportionate impacts.
BUILDINGS
Without stormwater system improvements, over 11,000 structures citywide62 will
be directly exposed to late-century stormwater flooding as a result of sea level rise and increased precipitation. Many more will be indirectly impacted.
Though stormwater flooding exposure is primarily a nuisance and largely does not imply structural damage even with direct exposure, ponding water may compromise access to buildings, present transportation challenges, and damage yards and other landscaped areas. In addition, buildings
that are still connected to the combined sewer system may experience wastewater backup issues.
62 Current building stock in areas expected to be exposed. The change in building stock has not been projected.
Although not evaluated within this Vulnerability Assessment, rain events more extreme than the 10-year, 24-hour rainfall will have more severe impacts in Boston, though the impacts would be
less frequent. Additional analysis on extreme event flooding and the sensitivity to climate change is recommended for future analyses.
 BUILDINGS EXPOSED TO FREQUENT STORMWATER FLOODING WITH VARYING CLIMATE CONDITIONS
 NEIGHBORHOOD
2030S–2050S
2060S–2090S
2070S–2100S
Dorchester
 1,200
 1,260
 1,390
 South End
 1,110
 1,320
 2,040
 Roslindale
880
890
960
 Roxbury
  870
  900
  950
    East Boston
Allston/Brighton
Mattapan
Back Bay/Beacon Hill
Fenway/Kenmore
West Roxbury
Hyde Park
Jamaica Plain
South Boston
Downtown
Charlestown
Harbor Islands
Boston Total
670
660
640
530
440
420
410
340
340
260
200
<10
8,970
820 1,000
660 730
670 710
580 600
460 490
420 450
420 460
350 390
370 490
310 350
210 240
<10 <10
9,610 11,230
BUILDINGS EXPOSED TO FREQUENT STORMWATER FLOODING BY TYPE (2070s TO 2100s)
               BUILDINGS EXPOSED TO CHRONIC STORMWATER FLOODING
  Climate Vulnerability Assessment 45

INFRASTRUCTURE
Access and mobility can be impacted at multiple scales ranging from building entrances to local streets to major thoroughfares like highways and
MBTA lines.
employees. Every minute counts with essential services, and extended service time is associated with increased risk of mortality and harm in health and safety situations.
ECONOMY
Frequent stormwater flooding will inconvenience customers and discourage them from using nearby businesses.
Though this analysis does not have sufficient
data to quantify economic impacts, it is expected that local business may be negatively impacted
by frequent stormwater flooding. Around 800 commercial buildings are expected to be within late-century frequently flooded areas, with greatest concentrations of exposed commercial buildings located in Downtown and Dorchester. Businesses can expect brief closures during and after flood events, with the potential for prolonged closure if there is direct damage to property. Even without damages to buildings, continued flood damage to parking lots, sidewalks, and landscaping can cause these assets to deteriorate more rapidly, potentially contributing to uneven surfaces and negative appearances that would impact safety, as well as customer choices.
COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOODING
The probability of high-impact storms in the City of Boston is increasing over time.
Coastal and riverine flooding is expected to lead to the most significant increases in climate hazard consequences to people, buildings, infrastructure, and the economy.
Over the course of the twenty-first century, Boston will become incrementally more exposed to extensive coastal and riverine flooding in neighborhoods fronting Boston Harbor, Fort Point Channel, Dorchester Bay, and the Chelsea, Mystic, and Charles Rivers. Neighborhoods fronting the coastline, like Downtown, East Boston, and South Boston, are especially vulnerable currently and will grow more vulnerable in the coming decades.
Coastal and riverine flooding consequences will increase dramatically by the middle and end of the century as storm frequency increases and flooding via new pathways becomes more probable.
Many areas impacted by lower probability events (i.e., 1 percent annual chance floods) in the early to mid-century are expected to face exposure to flooding from the monthly highest tides by the mid- to late century. As sea levels rise in Boston Harbor, coastal flooding is also significantly
more likely to penetrate inland through Fort
Point Channel to much of the South End and
the northern portion of Roxbury. Additionally, neighborhoods along the Charles River, including Allston/Brighton, Back Bay/Beacon Hill, and Fenway/Kenmore, are more likely to face exposure to flooding late in the century when the Charles River Dam is at a higher risk of being flanked or overtopped.
 Flood hazard data and adaptation recommendations developed as part of the 2015 MassDOT-FHWA study are an essential component of the Climate Ready Boston analysis.
As discussed in this section and the Focus Areas chapter, the rich MassDOT-FHWA flood hazard dataset has been critical to quantifying exposure and consequences. Coupled with the Climate Ready Boston general building stock and asset inventory, a comprehensive assessment of coastal and riverine flooding exposure and consequences is possible within Climate Ready Boston, while creating a foundation for future studies.
Without improvements to the stormwater management system, frequent stormwater flooding is projected near major thoroughfares, such as Columbus Avenue, Tremont Street, and Morrissey Boulevard, as well as Interstates 90 and 93 and along the MBTA Orange and Red Lines. Because data resolution is not great enough, this analysis may not be well suited to accurately reflect stormwater flooding extents along these MBTA lines, roadways, and highways. Nevertheless, it is clear that, at a minimum, the flood data highlight potential nuisance flooding at intersections and onramps providing access to these transportation routes. Many of these transportation routes are also designated evacuation routes, which may become increasingly more flood prone to heavy rainfall.
Increased precipitation may impact emergency response time throughout the city.
Several hospital campuses, fire stations, and police stations are expected to experience frequent stormwater flooding in their vicinity and possibly within structures in the future, including Carney Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston Medical Center, and the Boston Police Headquarters. Impeded vehicle access to and from such facilities may impact
the timeliness of response vehicles to emergency situations. Access issues due to stormwater flooding may also impact shift changes—
essential services operate around the clock, and
a delay in shift change could potentially result
in a diminished quality of service due to tired
The factors driving risk from coastal and riverine flooding vary greatly along the waterfront.
Boston could manage much of the coastal flooding projected early in this century by addressing low points at the waterfront through which water could penetrate inland. This kind of approach could
be particularly effective in Charlestown and East Boston, where the length of waterfront sections with low elevations is comparatively limited.
South Boston, in contrast, will be challenged
early in the century even with relatively moderate increases in sea levels. In this neighborhood, significant portions of the waterfront serve as
flood entry points, so developing strategies to increase protection would require more significant investments in infrastructure or more complex coastal flood resiliency planning. Other flood entry points, such as the flanking of the Charles River Dam or Fort Point Channel, are likely to require large-scale infrastructure improvements to reduce flood risk but would likewise result in significant benefits, reducing flood exposure across multiple neighborhoods. See the Protected Shores resilience initiatives (p.98) and the Focus Areas chapter (p. 148) for more details on potential flood protection systems.
46 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 47

 As the sea level continues to rise, the likelihood of major floods will increase from a 1% annual chance to a monthly reality
  2030s–2050s: 9 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE63
63 Future flood extents shown only within City of Boston for all conditions.
  COASTAL AND RIVERINE FLOOD SCENARIOS
For each of the three sea level rise scenarios considered, Climate Ready Boston also evaluated expected exposure and impacts for four modeled flood events, as well as the average monthly high tide (see Process Overview for more on the average monthly high tide). The modeled flood events coincide with the 10 percent, 2 percent, 1 percent, and 0.1 percent annual chance flood events, plus appropriate sea level rise. The lower probability the event, the higher the magnitude and severity of impact can be expected from
the storm when it arrives.
PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE
The 1 percent annual chance flood has a 1 in 100 chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year and is the primary coastal flood hazard delineated in FEMA FIRMs. Percent annual chance flood elevations do not imply a period of time between occurrences. Though the chance of occurrence each year may seem relatively low, a 1 percent annual chance event could occur multiple times in a given year, decade, or century. Climate Ready Boston uses a 1 percent annual chance flood nomenclature rather than the “100-year” flood, in order to
limit confusion related to the possible time horizon of an event occurring. The 100-year flood event terminology can more easily be misinterpreted to imply that 100-year events occur
only once every 100 years. In reality, these events have close
to a one in three chance of occurring at least once during a 30-year period.
 48 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 49
2050s-2100s: 21 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE
 
  2070s OR LATER: 36 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE
AREA AND PERCENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD EXPECTED TO EXPERIENCE FLOOD IMPACTS
UNDER THE 1 PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD EVENT IN EACH SEA LEVEL RISE SCENARIO
 LAND AREA EXPOSED (ACRES)
PERCENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD EXPOSED
  Neighborhoods
Total Land Area (Acres)
21” SLR
1% annual chance
36% 31% 30% 28% 48%
2%
1% <1% 11% 3%
36” SLR
1% annual chance
54% 45% 49% 32% 63%
7% 17% 5% 20% 71%
36” SLR
AMHT
12% 10% 14% 24% 19%
1% <1% <1% 6% <1%
I. Greatest Exposure & increasing throughout century
9” SLR
1% annual chance
21” SLR
1% annual chance
310
240 1,040 230 930
36” SLR
1% annual chance
460
350 1,680 260 1,220
240 80 130 750 450
36” SLR
AMHT
110 70 480 200 360
20 <10 <10 220 <10
9” SLR
1% annual chance
14% 14% 16% 25% 24%
1% <1% <1% 6% <1%
<1% 0 0
8% 10% 18% 8%
 Charlestown 870 Downtown 770
120 110 540 200 470
East Boston Harbor Islands South Boston
3,340 820 1,940
II. Lower Exposure today, but significant jump late century
 Allston / Brighton
Back Bay / Beacon Hill Roxbury
Dorchester
South End
III. Other Neighborhoods
Fenway / Kenmore Hyde Park Jamaica Plain Mattapan Roslindale
West Roxbury
Boston Total
2,940 460 2,770 3,780 640
620 3,260 2,260 1,560 2,250 3,350
31,720
30 <10 <10 240 <10
<10 0 0
70 <10 <10 430 20
 50 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
<10 0 0 0000 0000 0000
<1% 0 0 0000 0000 0000
<10 0 0
<10 0 0
<1% 0 0
<1% 0 0
1,720 3,280 5,630 1,470
AMHT is the Average monthly highest tide
 Ten percent of Boston’s land area is expected face exposure to 1 percent annual chance coastal and riverine flooding as soon as the 2050s. In the late century, this increases to 18 percent.
As soon as the 2070s, almost 5 percent of Boston’s land area
is expected to face exposure to inundation from the average monthly high tide.
East Boston and South Boston have the most land area affected by coastal flooding and sea level rise.
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 51

 BACK TO THE FUTURE?
Landmarks nearest the coast, like the Institute for Contemporary Art, the New England Aquarium, and Boston Children’s Museum, lie
in some of the most exposed parts of the city. Faneuil Hall and Quincy Market are slightly farther inland but without additional actions are also at risk of flooding during future high tides. Many of the city’s oldest landmarks, such as the Old State House, Paul Revere House, and Old North Church, sit on higher ground, above flood risk. Why are many of the Boston’s oldest landmarks out of the projected floodplains?
The relative safety of these older landmarks reflects the history of our city: transformed through centuries of landfill, the original islands and peninsula of the city remain higher and more protected than areas built on filled tidelands. Comparison of Boston’s original landforms to the 1 percent annual chance floodplain late in the century shows a close parallel; large portions of the original landforms in Charlestown, the North End, Downtown,
East Boston, and South Boston remain out of the coastal floodplain even late in the century while areas that were filled over time are at higher risk of flooding from coastal storms. However, some filled areas, like parts of Columbia Point, were filled to higher elevations and therefore face less exposure to future flooding.
The impacts of climate change are not only isolated to coastal storms. By late in the century, the most noticeable changes to our current landscape will likely be seen during high tides, which will creep higher and higher over the decades. By 2100, the extent of future high tide could be similar to flooding caused by a major storm early in this century.
52 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
  CITYWIDE LAND ACRES EXPOSED
  CITYWIDE POPULATION EXPOSED
PEOPLE
In the late century, 75 percent of
buildings exposed will be either residential or mixed-use, potentially exposing over 88,000 people (nearly 15 percent of Boston’s population) to coastal and riverine flooding.64
The majority of the more than 88,000 Bostonians who will be exposed to late-century 1 percent annual chance coastal storms and sea level rise impacts reside in four neighborhoods: Downtown, East Boston, South Boston, and the South End. Projected future 10-year, 24-hour stormwater flooding for the same time period has similar building and population exposure statistics. Nevertheless, coastal and riverine flooding is
64 All population, structure, and infrastructure exposure figures refer to potential future hazards projected onto current conditions. No projections have been completed for the purposes of the quantitative analysis due to inherent uncertainty.
considered more dangerous, as it is more likely to result in massive property damage and injury and can require years for full recovery. Further, unresolved impacts following coastal storms can become long-term chronic issues.
For late-century climate conditions, estimates
show that more than 9,000 people in these four neighborhoods will be in need of public shelter due to a coastal flood. The existing emergency shelters located in these neighborhoods have a combined capacity of just over 1,000 people.
 Climate Vulnerability Assessment 53
 
 Neighborhood
East Boston
Downtown
POPULATION EXPOSED BY SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
    Total
40,500
31,780
AMHT
280
100
9” SLR (2030s - 2050s) 21” SLR (2050s - 2100s) 36” SLR (2070s or later)
   10%
820
1,680
1%
7,020
2,330
0.10%
16,670
6,400
AMHT
770
100
10%
9,090
3,090
1%
16,700
7,340
0.10%
18,500
AMHT
6,300
10%
18,180
8,750
1%
19,070
10,960
0.10%
20,410
16,090
The South End and East Boston both have significant populations of low- to no- income residents within future flood extents.67
Areas outlined on the map
in black represent census tracts with the top quartile
of concentrations of low- to no-income residents. Census tracts falling in the top quartile had concentrations of over 170 low-income households per acre of land area.
A major storm at 36 inches of sea level rise impacts the vulnerable neighborhoods of East Boston, Dorchester, Roxbury, and the South End.
The South End and East Boston both have significant populations of low- to no- income residents within future flood extents.
 30,020
630
2,190
4,680
9,600
860
3,770
9,940
12,810
2,990
11,120
13,950
 South Boston
9,210
2,270
12,260
 87,380 0 150 340 5,740 20 3,530 5,100 6,590 160 5,760 6,820 9,700 16,430 350 420 1,340 3,600 350 2,530 3,730 4,750 1220 3,920 5,180 5,540 38,600 0 0 0 230 0 0 240 23,350 0 24,980 27,400 35,940 22,600 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,920 0 10 4,630 13,650 71,580 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 720 0 1060 1,830 3,590 74,990 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 190 0 0 190 2,380 44,260 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 60 31,400
Dorchester
Charlestown
SouthEnd
BackBay/BeaconHill
Roxbury
Allston/Brighton
Fenway/Kenmore
HarborIslands 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
        HydePark JamaicaPlain Mattapan WestRoxbury Roslindale
32,310 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 42,070 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 33,680 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 30,440 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 37,720 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
     Boston Total
634,440
 54 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 55
1,360
5,260
15,700
42,250
2,110
22,010
43,060
78,055
12,930
73,790
90,080
150,950
 At the 36-inch sea level rise condition, 10 percent of Boston’s K–12 schools are exposed to lower-probability flood impacts.65
Closure of these schools as a result of flooded access or direct damage would affect over 11,500 current students—15 percent of all of Boston’s school-age population.
Coastal flooding is particularly disruptive and dangerous for those living in chronically stressed neighborhoods, without resources or education for disaster preparedness and recovery.
Coastal flooding will have a significant near-term impact on socially vulnerable populations living in waterfront areas like East Boston. Moreover, with 36 inches of sea level rise, a major coastal storm will impact even inland neighborhoods
65 Percentage of all schools mapped by Climate Ready Boston thus far.
like Roxbury and portions of Dorchester. This is a concern because of the multiple layers of vulnerability that these neighborhoods are already facing.
The risk of major storms is very difficult for members of the population to conceptualize if they have not experienced one in their lifetime. As such, risk may be underappreciated, and residents may fail to prepare adequately or evacuate
on time. In communities with lower levels of education and income, people may simply lack
the resources to adequately prepare. Additionally, large-scale flood defense infrastructure can result in a false sense of security for some communities; flood defense systems, like in New Orleans, can never fully eliminate risk of inundation, making multiple mitigating lines of defense, as well as preparedness and evacuation measures, vitally important. Such factors together exacerbated impacts of Hurricane Katrina in Louisiana in 2005.
In a major flooding emergency, effective communication of information becomes essential to safety and even survival. Those lacking information because of social isolation or limited technology, literacy, or English proficiency are at risk of missing crucial information, and preparedness plans must
take this into consideration. Flooding carries physical risk of bodily harm, even after the immediate storm danger has passed. Within the week following Hurricane Sandy, more than 10 percent of the population in the flooded area suffered some sort of injury; injuries occurred during evacuation and cleanup or repair of damaged or destroyed homes.66
Those with impaired mobility (older adults, people with medical illness, and people with disabilities) may need special transportation and are at risk of being left behind. Recovery resources must be accessible to those with mobility or other issues. Evacuation of hospitalized or long-term care patients carries with it additional risks of death or injury.
Source: “Nonfatal Injuries 1 Week after Hurricane Sandy.” CDC Report. October 2014.
66 http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6342a4.htm.
67 Map highlights census tracts falling within top quartile for density of low- to no-income residents. Flood extents shown are with 36 inches of sea level rise.
    
BUILDINGS
By number of structures alone (as opposed to square footage or market value), more than 10 percent of Boston’s existing buildings will be exposed to late-century flooding.
Of exposed buildings late century, the majority (almost 80 percent) are concentrated in the four neighborhoods of the South End, East Boston, South Boston, and Downtown, in that order.
Office, retail, and service-based commercial buildings are among
the top impacted buildings in terms of numbers for all sea level rise conditions.
After residential and mixed-use buildings, commercial structures make up the highest
CITYWIDE BUILDINGS EXPOSED
percentage of structures exposed to sea level rise and coastal storms (20 percent, 12 percent, and 10 percent for the early-, mid-, and late-century sea level rise conditions, respectively). Commercial buildings vulnerable to sea level rise and coastal storms are most concentrated in Downtown and South Boston.
Toward the end of the century, 5 percent of Boston’s real estate market value is expected to suffer flood exposure to high tides, increasing to 25 percent for less frequent but more severe events.
Another way to view buildings’ exposure is through real estate market value. Market value exposure takes into consideration the size and relative desirability of location and features of structures exposed to future flood risk, and considers land
BUILDINGS EXPOSED BY SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
value. Land value is an important consideration when looking at exposure of buildings to recurrent flooding, particularly flooding of the sort that may occur with high tides. Studies have shown that real estate market values can decrease significantly with increased perception of flood risk. The area identified as the Special Flood Hazard Area on FEMA flood maps is subject to mortgage-related flood insurance requirements, as well as higher flood insurance premiums. As such, flood risk exposure to lower-probability events may not only affect the cost of ownership of exposed buildings in the future but also affect their desirability.
By the end of the century, mixed-use buildings will occupy about half of real estate market value exposure to flooding from high tides alone,
followed (by a wide margin) by commercial, general government, and residential uses, in that order. High tide exposure of the market value of transportation-related buildings68 increases by significant orders of magnitude from mid- to late century. Transportation-related structures and essential facilities (such as Fire, EMS, police stations, and hospitals) are expected to have over $1.3 billion in property value exposed to average monthly high tide flood events during that same period.
Any structure can experience cascading impacts as a result of direct losses to other infrastructure service sectors, regardless of whether the site experiences direct flood impacts. This concept is further described in the Interdependencies section below.
68 Transportation-related buildings are those defined by the Boston Assessing Department as terminals for trucks, air freight, bus and rail, and the airport, in addition to Port Authority property, piers and docks, hangars, and railroad structures.
 9”SLR (2030s - 2050s)
21” SLR (2050s - 2100s)
60 360 610
36” SLR (2070s or later)
850 1,210
     Neighborhood
Total
AMHT
10%
1%
0.10%
AMHT
10%
1%
0.10%
AMHT
10%
1%
0.10%
East Boston
 6,930 2,960 6,800
20
 90 160 160
1,070 390 350
2,540 830 730
70 80 30
1,420 390 420
2,570 850 1,000
2,920 1,150 1,360
990 300 280
2,830 1,050 1,270
3,080 1,240 1,530
3,330 1450 1,750
Downtown
60
 South Boston
  20
            Dorchester
Charlestown
SouthEnd
Allston/Brighton 22,600 0
820
1,090 610
120
2,000 780
15,740 30 3,420 20 3,980 0
90 170 70 140
    410
0 0 50 0 0 50 2,950 0 3,120 3,440 3,730 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,920 0 10 4,630 13,650
30 170 420
140
470 680
            HarborIslands
Back Bay/ Beacon Hill Roxbury
Fenway/ Kenmore Hyde Park
Jamaica Plain Mattapan
Roslindale
West Roxbury
130 <10
<10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10
    3,470 10,000 2,000 8,490 6,690 6,090 7,660 9,390
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 200 0 0 80 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
<10 600 1,940 90 240 460
0 <10 1,440 0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
                             Boston Total
101,980
 150
580
2,130
5,380
260
2,750
5,530
10,430
1,830
9,710
1,2100
1,7140
      56 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 57
Building exposure is based on present-day building stock currently located within projected flood area.

INFRASTRUCTURE
Key components of Boston’s transportation system, most notably MBTA T service
and evacuation routes, may be at risk to coastal and riverine flood impacts in the near future.
Many residents depend on Boston’s public transit system to get to work, school, or healthcare, and this system is one of the first to face exposure
to coastal flooding. Twelve MBTA stations face exposure to sea level rise impacts from lower- probability events in the near term. This includes four Blue Line stations that connect East Boston to Downtown and eight Silver Line stations in South Boston. With increasing sea level rise, almost a third of MBTA T stations face exposure as soon as the 2070s. Any MBTA Blue and Orange Line station closures69 could restrict travel between East Boston, Downtown, and Charlestown; MBTA Silver Line station closures would affect South Boston and the South End. Service interruptions at one station may impact service for an entire line.
Alternative transportation options may
be especially difficult for East Boston and Charlestown residents to take advantage of, as these areas are physically separated from other Boston neighborhoods.
Major roads and evacuation routes, as well as Central Artery/Tunnel (CA/T) facilities, are expected to face significant sea level rise impacts, and bus transit can expect to be interrupted in the case of flooded roadways or tunnels. Even in the near future, one-third of the evacuation routes serving the city are expected to have at least some portion impacted during storm events. As soon
as the 2070s, the majority of identified evacuation routes may have some portion flooded during low- probability storms. In addition, two-thirds of the
69 This analysis considers exposure as opposed to expected site-specific impacts to infrastructure assets. Site-specific analysis will determine to what extent assets may already be resistant to flood impacts and should be conducted as part of resiliency planning efforts.
58 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
EVACUATION ROUTE EXPOSURE
CA/T assets70 are within identified flood extents of coastal storms by the end of the century. CA/T and major road vulnerability poses potential threats
to evacuation processes, and flood repairs to these routes would extend gridlock and traffic-delay issues, affecting air quality and quality of life for commuters. Moreover, for those who do not have access to a personal vehicle or cannot afford a taxi or similar option in the case that alternate forms of transportation are needed, getting around may not be possible.
MassDOT is currently working on resilience plans for the Sumner, Callahan, and Ted Williams Tunnels to combat coastal storm and sea level rise impacts expected in the near future. Additional consequences of transportation failures are described in the Interdependencies section below.
Two hundred and forty essential and public facilities currently lie within late- century coastal flood extents for lower- probability storms.
Together, law enforcement stations, fire stations, and EMS stations are expected to have the greatest share of their facilities exposed throughout the century. A quarter of Boston’s law enforcement stations alone are within late-century projected flood extents for low-probability events. All essential facilities, by regulation, must have emergency protective measures in place to
ensure operations continue during flood events.
If an essential facility such as a fire station, EMS station, or law enforcement station is temporarily inoperable, a common practice is for the closest station to assume responsibility for covering
the service population. As distance between essential service stations and locations that
71 Exposed infrastructure assets portrayed in this table are based on the information gathered and mapped by Climate Ready Boston as of July 2016. Climate Ready Boston recognizes gaps in the asset inventory exist and recommends that future assessments confirm existing data and continue to refine the dataset.
72 MBTA stations include commuter rail and T stations, including Silver Line surface bus stations.
   MBTA STATION EXPOSURE
 2070s or later
 PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION EXPOSED TO FLOODING WITH 36" SLR
 CURRENT TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE EXPOSED TO A 1 PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD: NUMBER OF ASSETS AND PERCENT OF TOTAL ASSETS IN CATEGORY71
 Facility Type
9”SLR
21”SLR
36”SLR
Major Evacuation Routes
CA/T Assets 70
Water Transportation Facilities
MBTA Stations72
21 (33%) 18 (19%) 6 (24%) 6 (24%)
30 (48%) 30 (48%) 15 (60%) 18 (17%)
39 (62%) 61 (66%) 18 (72%) 32 (30%)
    Climate Vulnerability Assessment 59
    
require public safety assistance increases, so does the response time. As response time increases,
the chance of a successful outcome decreases. Associated costs could include more fire losses,
an increase in completed crime, and an upturn in casualties during life-safety related incidents. The Massachusetts State Police Turnpike Headquarters is expected to face exposure to coastal storm and sea level rise impacts in the near future, while the Harbor Patrol and Suffolk County Sherriff’s office will be exposed mid- to late century.
CURRENT ESSENTIAL AND PUBLIC ASSETS EXPOSED TO A 1 PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS AND PERCENT OF TOTAL BUILDINGS IN CATEGORY73
may require evacuation, and incoming patients may be redirected to other medical facilities in
the region, which could create overcrowding issues at other hospitals and emergency facilities, potentially resulting in delays in healthcare. Evacuation of patients carries its own risks to health and life safety, particularly to critically ill and at-risk patients, which are carefully considered prior to and during an event. Partners Healthcare is currently in the process of conducting an independent risk evaluation and actively planning appropriate resiliency measures. Partners Healthcare designed Spaulding to be climate resilient, and it is expected to be prepared for lower-probability flood events in the near future.
Most currently mapped water, wastewater, and stormwater facilities are not directly exposed to coastal and riverine flooding until late in the century.
Of the existing MWRA and BWSC water and
wastewater facilities mapped by Climate Ready
Boston, only the Sullivan Square Pump Station
in Charlestown is currently exposed to coastal
Boston’s natural and recreational resources, particularly waterfront parks, are highly vulnerable to coastal flooding.
Boston’s waterfront parks, as expected, are very exposed to coastal flooding. Also exposed are
large recreation areas like Victory Park and the Neponset River Estuary Area in Dorchester, the Neponset River Reservation in Mattapan, and the Charles River Esplanade. Park structures are at risk to a flood event, and trees and other vegetation in parks can be susceptible to damage from frequent saltwater exposure. Other natural resources, like Belle Isle Marsh, serve as protective barriers in a storm surge event. These assets are susceptible to
a changing climate and flooding, and the City must take care to maintain them as habitats and flood protection resources. Landmark open spaces like the Boston Public Garden are at risk from future storms, while the Boston Common sits on higher ground and is not expected to be exposed to even the 1 percent annual chance flood with
36 inches of sea level rise.
Boston’s energy systems are critical in a flood situation, and all essential operations rely on private companies as the first source of energy. Vulnerabilities to some energy infrastructure are understood, but additional assessments are needed.77
Boston’s energy system is composed of many private companies that operate natural gas, petroleum, electricity, and renewable energy. Veolia Kneeland Street Plant is currently exposed to high-probability flood impacts in the near term, and approximately 250 steam delivery and distribution points could experience temporary service curtailments if the plant is to be impacted. Nevertheless, Veolia is currently planning the potential replacement of the facility; MassDOT redevelopment efforts and the new facility would be designed for climate resiliency.
The Charlestown Wind Turbine and Mystic Generating Station are exposed to mid-century sea level rise impacts for lower probability storms. Resilience plans are in place for each of these facilities, but specific impacts for mid- to late century are not currently known. As soon as
the 2070s, all of Veolia’s steam supply points are expected to experience significant flooding as the result of a 1 percent annual chance event, but they could be quickly stabilized following an event, as the steam distribution system is not expected to experience impacts. Further, Veolia is currently pursuing system resilience by modifying plants to upgrade emergency and alternate power systems.
National Grid, an electricity and gas utility, has many distribution mains and gas regulator stations in Boston that will be exposed to sea level rise and coastal and riverine flooding. Half of the regulator stations that will be exposed are already protected against current storm surge, and the utility has performed its own vulnerability assessment to identify and prioritize resiliency upgrades to assets over the next three years. National Grid operates throughout Massachusetts, and infrastructure investments will not be targeted solely toward Boston.
Eversource, an electric and gas utility, has conducted an assessment of potential power outages during severe coastal storms (e.g., 1 percent to 0.1 percent annual chance) expected late century. Expected outage durations vary throughout Boston based on the vulnerability of individual electrical grid assets. The longest durations of outage due to system flood impacts are expected in East Boston and Back Bay, while Beacon Hill, Fenway/Kenmore, and South Boston are expected to have both the shortest duration and only partial outages.
77 Information provided herein has been collected directly from the private energy companies.
  FACILITY TYPE
9”SLR
21”SLR
36”SLR
 Emergency Response Facilities74
Non-Emergency Medical Facilities
Educational and Childcare Facilities75
13 (4%) 9 (2%) 12 (1%)
23 (8%) 32 (7%) 46 (5%)
57 (20%)
70 (16%) 110 (13%)
   Several Boston Medical Center campus buildings in the South End and Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital structures in Charlestown will face exposure to sea level rise in the mid- to late century.
The Boston Medical Center is the largest safety- net hospital and Level I trauma center in New England, and Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital
is the official teaching hospital for Harvard Medical School’s Department of Physical Medicine. Together, the two facilities have over 600 beds. Both facilities are exposed to coastal and riverine flooding and sea level rise. Flooding of hospitals could have a significant impact on the region’s healthcare system, as most hospitals within the system are currently at capacity. Existing patients
73 Exposed infrastructure assets portrayed in this table are based on the information gathered and mapped by Climate Ready Boston as of July 2016. Climate Ready Boston recognizes gaps in the asset inventory exist and recommends future assessments serve to confirm existing data and fill in gaps.
74 Emergency Response Facilities include emergency medical services, law enforcement, fire stations, hospitals, and emergency shelters.
75 Educational and Childcare Facilities include child care centers, K–12 schools, and colleges and universities.
60 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Of the 27 water and wastewater facilities identified within the city limits, three combined sewer overflow (CSO) facilities, nine stormwater pump stations, and three sanitary sewer pump stations are located within late-century flood extents for lower probability storms. The stormwater pump stations service evacuation routes and other transportation infrastructure;
if these pumps fail, finding alternative routes would be necessary. At-risk sanitary sewer and CSO assets service growing areas within Boston and already have protection measures in place
or planned to ensure continuity of operations, including redundant pumps and generators.
76 The BWSC Wastewater Facilities Study identified the Sullivan Square Pump Station exposure, noting the consequence of failure for the pump station as roadway flooding and the required use of alternate routes.
storms.
76
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 61

 EVERSOURCE POWER OUTAGE VULNERABILITIES AND DURATIONS FOR LATE-CENTURY SEVERE COASTAL STORMS
To mitigate the effects of sea level rise and
climate change, Eversource is making significant investments in the local electrical grid to harden and make it more resilient to coastal storms
and climate change. This is exemplified in the construction of Substation 99 on the South Boston Waterfront. The substation, which was built as a response to the rapid development and growth in the South Boston Waterfront, sits on a reinforced, elevated steel platform. Sitting nearly 26 feet above mean sea level, this substation is designed to withstand significant storm surge and flooding scenarios.
Telecommunications providers in Boston share critical infrastructure networks to provide service. Few redundancies exist, other than those built directly by providers, and essential and critical facilities
could find themselves limited to radio communication in a flood event.
Telecommunication is a critical service to essential and critical facilities, particularly in times of emergency, when systems may be compromised. The timeliness of emergency medical and public safety calls and data transfer is critical for successful outcomes. Providers such as Comcast and Verizon typically deliver their services through satellite or fiber networks. Cable, land telephone lines, and cellular service for multiple carriers is often provided over shared fiber networks, reducing system redundancy between providers. Compromised fiber networks would slow communications and require customers
to rely on backup communication options,
such as satellite cellular services not reliant on fiber or radio frequencies. Wireless services are relied upon heavily in an emergency or flood event; this can lead to delays in the transfer
of phone calls and data, particularly if fiber networks are compromised. For this reason, individual providers work to introduce multiple redundancies within the fiber network system,
and the system is continually assessed and prioritized for vulnerabilities. Fiber networks are versatile and can be quickly rerouted through alternate shared lines.
Providers indicate they maintain a robust risk- management program in order to limit service interruptions. For example, if a single distribution facility is compromised, fiber networks allow
rapid rerouting and redistribution of service, and outages are tracked via sophisticated programs that identify sites of loss. Certain providers, such as Comcast, maintain use of mutual aid and service agreements to ensure rapid distribution of generators and fuel in the case of regional disaster situations in order to speed repair services, as would be the case in a hurricane, nor’easter, or blizzard. Telephone service is prioritized as the most important communication option to maintain after emergency alert systems. Nevertheless, individuals and government agencies must consider communication backups to supplement the efforts of the providers.
Exposure of regional assets, such as the Chelsea and Everett food distribution markets and oil refineries on Chelsea Creek, will have an effect on Boston resiliency and should be considered in planning efforts.
Though not covered within the exposure and consequence analysis, Boston is dependent upon resources and assets located outside the city limits. For example, two fresh-food distributors located in Chelsea and Everett (New England Produce Center and Boston Market Terminal, respectively) have been flagged as potential vulnerabilities in Boston’s food distribution system because of current and future flood risk. Furthermore, the majority of food that comes into Boston is trucked in through I-93, which is expected to be exposed to coastal and riverine flooding throughout this century.
  62 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 63

 BOSTON’S INFRASTRUCTURE INTERDEPENDENCIES
The relationships and dependencies between different infrastructure networks are complex and intertwined. Each infrastructure system depends on others to sustain operation,
as illustrated through the descriptions above. As part of the development of the Vulnerability Assessment, IAG members provided input regarding potential interdependencies between infrastructure assets and systems.78 The Vulnerability Assessment identified infrastructure systems that IAG organizations rely on for their core functions, as well as anticipated consequences of full or partial system failures.
Members of the IAG have identified continued functionality of the city’s transportation infrastructure as a top resiliency priority. Many members have identified road and bridge functionality as a key critical requirement so citizens can evacuate; emergency vehicles can pass; maintenance trucks can reach impacted electric, communication, and water/wastewater assets for
swift repair; and hospitals and other emergency facilities can continue to receive food, water, and medical supplies. In
turn, the transportation system relies on continued access to electricity and communications systems, so tunnels may remain open, and any blocked paths are cleared quickly or detours swiftly communicated.
Boston’s energy systems are also critical in a flood situation, and all critical and essential operations rely on private companies as the first source of energy. Though critical and essential operations most often have redundancies in their energy systems, back-up energy sources have limited capacity and cannot sustain operations for an extended period of time.
For example, water and sewer systems rely on energy to operate pump stations and process and treat wastewater; communication systems require significant amounts of electricity to run and to keep equipment cool; emergency shelters require heat, water and wastewater, and communication systems to be operational at all times; and hospitals need energy to continue to operate life-saving equipment.
78 Many details related to site-specific interdependencies are not described within this report due to data limitations and privacy or security concerns.
Nonessential assets are also affected by energy loss. Many buildings house primary and redundant energy assets, such as generators, in basements, which will likely be the first portions
of buildings to flood. If commercial buildings are without power for long periods of time, major productivity and revenue losses may be experienced. If private energy assets are impacted by flooding, repair crews require clear roads and bridges to access sites and transport heavy equipment. Steam-generating plants also rely on continuous water supply for operations.
MWRA and BWSC are highly dependent on each other to ensure continued operation of Boston’s water and wastewater system. MWRA operates water supply and treatment facilities within Boston, while BWSC handles potable water delivery and water/wastewater conveyance and pumping. If one of the two operations fail, then potable water and sewage treatment operations in Boston will be impacted. Uninterrupted service
of water and wastewater systems is essential for public health and safety facilities, such as hospitals and emergency shelters. Although water and wastewater operations rely on energy systems, failure to the system may be mechanical and require on-site repairs. As such, clear transportation routes are critical for continued operations of water and wastewater systems, particularly in the case of flood events.
All of these facilities require fuel to run generators in the case of power outages as well as to operate key equipment at their facilities. Fuel is often a key area of concern post-disaster, and critical shortages are common simply because of the compounded need. These shortages can be significantly exacerbated when fuel provider facilities themselves are compromised or transportation pathways are blocked, damaged, or submerged, leading to more severe cascading impacts across the infrastructure system.
Communication assets are critical in any emergency situation. Radio, telephone, and television-transmitting stations are necessary to keep lines of communication open between public safety agencies and the public so situational updates can continue to be conveyed. Moreover, communication interruptions can result in the loss of information distribution and potentially disrupt interactions among hospitals, government agencies, police, and EMTs.
64 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Our daily lives depend on
a complex, interconnected system.
  Climate Vulnerability Assessment 65

  EMPLOYMENT IMPACTS OF COASTAL FLOODING
ECONOMY
For all sea level rise conditions, restaurants, real estate, retail and wholesale trade, and transportation industries are consistently the most affected by business interruption due to coastal and riverine flooding.
Combined, the top four economic industries
in Boston expected to be affected by business interruption account for over 50 percent of the expected business interruption impacts for the
city (averaged across all sea level rise conditions). Business interruption also impacts jobs in Boston,
as a reduction in sales and revenues, as well
as temporary business closure, may ultimately reduce the number of jobs required to support the economy. The restaurant and retail industries lead with the most jobs impacted for each sea level rise condition, accounting for 80, 48, and 52 percent of the total annual jobs expected to be lost for early-, mid-, and late-century impacts, respectively. That these industries are affected by coastal and riverine flooding is another demonstration of how vulnerable populations will be impacted more significantly by climate change. Restaurant and retail sectors tend
to provide jobs for low- to moderate-income people, and those who lose their jobs or experience reduced work hours may struggle financially, even more so
if they are also burdened with structural damage or relocation costs.
SUMMARY AND ANNUALIZED RESULTS
Late-century sea level rise conditions combined with coastal storms make South Boston, Downtown, and the South End79 the top three impacted neighborhoods
in terms of expected costs of structure damage, contents losses, relocation costs, and stress factors in that time period, by a wide margin.
 Even considering only 9 inches of sea level rise, Boston is expected to experience roughly $137 million in annualized direct physical damage, stress factor, and displacement costs. These impacts are expected to increase tenfold to nearly $1.39 billion by late in the century for the four event scenarios considered in the Vulnerability Assessment (10 percent, 2 percent, 1 percent, and 0.1 percent annual chance flood events). Costs related to structural damage and contents losses make up the majority of these damage costs, averaging 95 percent of all direct damage costs across all three sea level rise conditions. South Boston accounts for the highest annualized damages for each sea level rise condition, comprising between 32 and 47 percent of the city’s total annualized direct damage costs. The sharpest increase in loss between mid- and late century is expected to take place in the South End, with a hundredfold increase in total annualized losses expected.
CITYWIDE ANNUALIZED LOSSES BY LOSS CATEGORY
  CALCULATING ANNUALIZED LOSSES
Annualized losses are calculated by multiplying
the potential consequence in dollars (such as damage costs for the 1 percent annual chance event) by the probability of occurrence for that consequence (1 percent annual chance). This allows for comparisons of different events across time. Depending on the circumstances, smaller but higher-probability storm events may actually yield more costs to the community over time than larger, lower-probability storm events. The graphic below displays this effect; the 10 percent annual chance events consistently carry the highest annualized values throughout the century within the City of Boston.
As flood risk increases this century and beyond, total expected annualized losses increase dramatically; severe storms are expected to become increasingly more frequent.
 66 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 67
79 Losses to South End are not expected to begin in earnest until late in the century.
2070s or later
Losses in the bar graph are expected total loss costs for direct damage, relocation, mental stress and anxiety, lost productivity, and business interruption. All values consider only present assets located within projected flood area.

   ANNUALIZED IMPACT TOTALS BY NEIGHBORHOOD AND CITYWIDE BUSINESS INTERRUPTION
ANNUALIZED DIRECT PHYSICAL DAMAGE, STRESS FACTORS, AND DISPLACEMENT COSTS FOR THE 36” CLIMATE CONDITION BY NEIGHBORHOOD
  9” SLR
21” SLR
36” SLR
Neighborhood
 $
 % Boston Total Losses
 $
 % Boston Total Losses
 $
 % Boston Total Losses
South Boston
 $64.6M
 48%
 $191M
 37%
 $450M
 27%
 Downtown
$44M
31%
$104M
20%
$289M
17%
 East Boston
 $13.3M
 8%
 $87.1M
 17%
 $179M
 11%
 Charlestown
 $8.9M
 6%
 $42.8M
 8%
 $120M
 7%
 Dorchester
 $6.2M
 4%
 $26.9M
 5%
 $92.5M
 6%
 South End
 $27k
 <1%
 $2.2M
 <1%
 $218M
 13%
 Roxbury
 <$1k
 <1%
 $189K
 <1%
 $33.8M
 2%
 Back Bay
 <$1k
 <1%
 $72K
 <1%
 $7.4M
 <1%
 Allston
 <$1k
 <1%
 $254K
 <1%
 $7.1M
 <1%
 Fenway/Kenmore
 <$1k
 <1%
 <$1k
 <1%
 $1.6M
 <1%
 Harbor Islands
  $252k
  <1%
  $284K
  <1%
  $328K
  <1%
 Citywide Business Interruption
$19.7M
13%
$63.8M
12%
$283M
17%
 Boston Total
 $157M
  $518M
  $1.68B
  DIRECT PHYSICAL DAMAGE
STRESS FACTORS
DISPLACEMENT COSTS
TOTAL
 South Boston
 $431M
 $4.7M
 $14.3M
$450M
 Downtown
 $276M
 $5.4M
 $7.3M
$289M
 South End
 $193M
 $14.1M
 $10.9M
$218M
 East Boston
 $163M
 $10.2M
 $6.4M
$179M
 Charlestown
 $115M
 $2M
 $3.4M
$120M
 Dorchester
 $86M
 $3.2M
 $3.4M
$92.5M
 Roxbury
 $32.6M
 $240K
 $970K
$33.8M
 Back Bay
 $6.6M
 $470K
 $310K
$7.3M
 Allston
 $7M
 $30K
 $120K
$7.1M
 Fenway
 $1.5M
 $120K
 $50K
$1.6M
 Harbor Islands
  $320K
  -
  $10K
 $330K
Boston Total
$1.3B
$40.4M
$47.1M
$1.4B
        Note: Values consider only present-day people and structures currently located within the projected flood area
68 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Climate Vulnerability Assessment 69

 36-INCH
 ANNUALIZED LOSSES FROM BUILDINGS,
9-INCH, 21-INCH, AND 36-INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITIONS
  9-INCH
21-INCH
The above map demonstrates expected annualized structure and contents losses per building for the 36-inch sea level rise condition.80
80 These expected losses only address the building stock current to 2016 and do not
take into consideration development changes or adaptation. Each bubble depicts a single structure, with the size of the bubble demonstrative of the magnitude of expected impacts to that structure. Concentrations of loss are depicted with darker colors.
High-rise buildings, concentrated in Downtown and South Boston, show heavier impacts for several reasons. Not only are these structures larger, but they typically penetrate more deeply into the
earth to accommodate their size and have more sophisticated and costly mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems, often located in the basements of these structures. Impacts to residential structures, however, should not be discounted.
The majority of loss expected throughout the city will be to residential properties.
 70 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 71

  CITY OF BOSTON ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
CITYWIDE ECONOMIC LOSSES
    Business interruption is expected to total nearly $250 million in annualized damages, accounting for 15 percent of mid- to late century total damages.
In addition to the $1.4 billion in expected annualized direct physical damage, stress factor, and displacement costs for the 36-inch sea level
rise condition, annualized economic output losses caused by business interruption within Boston total at least $283 million.81 This includes $201 million in direct output losses, which are sales and revenues lost by businesses that must close or relocate while
they repair flood-damaged structures or restock inventory. It also includes $82 million of losses
in industries that support the directly impacted businesses and losses due to decreased consumer spending. This brings the total annualized losses expected for the 36-inch sea level rise condition to $1.7 billion, with business interruption losses accounting for 17 percent of this total.
81 Business interruption values only consider businesses on floors that are directly impacted by flood events and assume that all businesses eventually reopen. Direct losses are calculated within Boston, and indirect and induced losses are only modeled throughout Suffolk County. In actuality, the entire building will often experience business interruption (though no reliable resource exists to consistently calculate business interruption impacts to an entire structure), many flooded businesses may not ever reopen after being directly flooded, and economic impacts could extend nationally
or internationally, depending upon industries affected. As such, these results are considered the minimum business interruption consequences of a regional flood event. See Appendix for more detail on methodology.
72 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
CITYWIDE ANNUALIZED LOSSES
2070s or later
 2070s or later
 All damage figures presented in this Exposure and Consequence Analysis may be considered the lower bound of actual economic losses that can result
from regional and site-specific82 coastal and riverine flooding for the below reasons. A full explanation of the limitations associated with this assessment can be found in the Appendix.
• Short- and long-term impacts to the local and federal government that follow a flood event, such as dispensing additional public aid and mobilizing emergency management crews, are not reflected in the damage costs. Such costs are based on
a variety of factors (including the scale and magnitude of the event, as well as the built and natural environment and population contexts) and are extremely difficult to predict.
• Businesses located above the second floor of
a multistory building are not considered in this analysis, even though those businesses may
also experience closures or damage (such as
mold accumulation) if power and water are not operating in the building. Further, code compliance actions that may be triggered by repairs (such as electrical and fire suppression systems) can run through the entirety of a building, depending on the specifics of the structure, further increasing restoration costs; such costs are not considered in this analysis.
• Impacts to the economy assume all businesses will eventually reopen, yet in reality almost 40 percent of all small businesses never reopen following a disaster.83
• Impacts to supporting economic industries and spending patterns are only acknowledged within the context of Suffolk County. Boston has broader economic relationships, which would increase the reverberation of impacts to the regional and broader economy.
• Calculations consider zero growth or change from the present-day population and built environment. Values are based on the imposition of current climate conditions on the current-day built environment.
82 Most losses, except for business interruption, are calculated on a per-structure basis.
83 Source: “National Flood Insurance Program: Protecting Your Business.” Federal Emergency Management Agency. http://www.fema.gov/ protecting-your-businesses.
Climate Vulnerability Assessment 73

 MAYOR MARTIN J. WALSH
   Climate Resilience Initiatives
Guided by the Vulnerability Assessment findings, which identified and quantified the impacts of future climate change, the City should undertake a set of climate resilience initiatives to address Boston’s climate risks. These initiatives will increase Boston’s ability to thrive in the face of intensifying climate hazards, leading to stronger neighborhoods and improved quality of life for all residents.
The climate resilience initiatives build on a broad set of efforts undertaken to date by the City and other actors to prepare Boston for climate change. To develop the initiatives, Climate Ready Boston reviewed past climate adaptation plans, interviewed a broad range
of local stakeholders, and examined best practices from other cities across the world that are contending with climate change impacts.
The City will need dedicated public and private partners, as well as significant additional resources, to advance these initiatives and implement comprehensive climate adaptation.
74 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 75
Image courtesy of Bud Ris
  
Climate Resilience Principles
Climate Ready Boston draws on five principles for successful resilience to climate change based on lessons from other cities. These principles are outlined below:
Generate multiple benefits.
Effective climate resilience initiatives both reduce
risks from climate hazards and create other benefits. Resilience initiatives that produce multiple benefits generate more resources to support their implementation and sustainability. Flood barriers that also provide recreational open space, developable land, or upgraded roadways represent examples of multiple-benefit solutions. Non-physical interventions also can offer multiple benefits, such as programs that help businesses and households make operational changes to reduce their flood risk while also lowering utility costs or reducing insurance premiums. Multiple-benefit approaches enable Boston to address some of the other pressing challenges that it faces beyond climate risks.
Incorporate local involvement in design and decision-making.
Effective resilience initiatives require on-the-ground knowledge and sustained community support for implementation and long- term operations and maintenance. Local stakeholders can help illuminate critical resilience opportunities in their communities and generate creative ideas for solving multiple challenges at once.
  Image courtesy of Sasaki
  76 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 77
 Climate Ready Boston / Boston Harbor Now Workshop

 Create layers of protection
by working at multiple scales. Layers that are independently effective can also work together to provide mutual support and reduce the
risk of a failure associated
with a single line of defense.
For example, to address extreme heat, adding green infrastructure (e.g., increasing tree canopy), in combination with building-scale adaptations (e.g., using cool roofing and paving materials or increasing energy efficiency), is more effective than doing either independently. Shading from the tree canopy reduces the cooling load on the building, and the retrofitted building radiates less heat, with a failure to either layer having less impact because of the other.
Leverage building cycles. Buildings and infrastructure experience regular cycles
of rehabilitation and replacement over time. Taking adaptation actions within the context of the building cycle can reduce disruption and cost, as in the case of green infrastructure installed as part of a road reconstruction project, rather than as a standalone project that would still require digging up roads. While the building
cycle progresses, operational changes,
as opposed to physical adaptations, can be made to reduce risks. For example, retailers can move the inventory stored in the basement of their stores onto shelves to reduce flood damage in the near term, before local flood defenses are built.
Design in flexibility and adaptability. Climate conditions will continue to change over time, and climate resilience initiatives must be designed to adapt to them. For example, the 24-hour rainfall for a 10-year storm is projected to increase through the century. To be effective, the stormwater system must be flexible enough to adapt to this increase in extreme precipitation.
In practice, this often means decentralized, distributed stormwater storage across cities that can be expanded without disrupting the gray stormwater system. Similarly, the elevation of 1 percent annual chance floods is also projected to increase throughout the century. Buildings can be built today with high ground-floor ceilings so that the ground floor can be raised as sea levels rise over time, without creating undesirably low floor-to-ceiling heights.
      78
Climate Resilience Initiatives 79
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
  Image courtesy of Sasaki

      Layers and Strategies
Climate resilience initiatives are actions
that Boston can undertake to improve its preparedness for climate change. They respond to the geographic extent, frequency, and severity of the three key climate hazards the city faces. The initiatives tied to extreme heat and stormwater flooding are meant to be applied citywide, given the geographic dispersion of those hazard impacts, while those tied to coastal and riverine flooding are targeted to the specific waterfront and inland areas exposed to this hazard.
The climate resilience initiatives have been organized into 5 layers and 11 strategies.
The first layer is an understanding of Boston’s future climate conditions, the foundation on which other initiatives rely. The remaining layers represent an approach to building resilience at different scales: the community, shoreline, infrastructure assets, and buildings. The layers are designed to support and reinforce each other. For example, a building that has been retrofitted for flood risk (Adapted Buildings) is more resilient if it sits behind a district-scale flood protection system (Protected Shores) that prevents the flooding of adjacent buildings and streets. It is even more resilient when
its users are aware of and have prepared
for climate risks (Prepared and Connected Communities), and the manmade and natural infrastructure that serves it is climate ready (Resilient Infrastructure).
Within each layer, individual initiatives are clustered under strategies, with the initiatives under each strategy reinforcing each other and driving toward related outcomes.
PREPARED AND CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
S
ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE
PROTECTED SHORES
A
       A
D
D
A
AP
P
T
T
E
ED
D
B
BU
U
I
I
L
LD
DI
IN
NG
GS
   38 Executive Summary
Increasing Boston's Climate Readiness 39
S S o o l l a a r r P Pa a n n e e l l s s & & District Microgrids
 Elevated First Floor
Climate-ready Zoning
A Ad d a ap p t t i io o n n a a s s a a Tool for Economic Development
Education/ Engagement Initiative
  VISUALIZING MULTIPLE LAYERS OF CLIMATE READINESS
Temporary Flood Barrier
D D i i s s t t r r i ic c t t S S c c a a l l e e Flood Protection
 Elevated Mechanical Systems
 Resilient Building Design
Small Business Preparedness Program
   Expanded and Maintained Urban Tree Canopy
Protective & Floodable Waterfront Park
  Green Infrastructure Bioswale
  LAYERS
OUTCOMES
  Updated Climate Projections
Prepared and Connected Communities Protected Shores
Resilient Infrastructure
Adapted Buildings
Ensure that decision making in Boston is informed by the latest Boston-specific climate projections.
Support educated, connected, empowered communities in pursuing operational preparedness, adaptation planning, and emergency response.
Reduce Boston’s risk of coastal and riverine flooding through both nature-based and hard-engineered flood defenses.
Prepare the infrastructure systems that support life in Boston for future climate conditions and create new resilient systems.
Create a regulatory environment and financial and other tools to promote new and existing buildings that are climate ready.
          80 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 81
Potential Harbor Barrier

  Layer 1 UPDATED CLIMATE
PROJECTIONS
82 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Climate Resilience Initiatives 83

 Strategy 1: Maintain up-to-date information on future climate conditions in Boston
INITIATIVE 1-1. UPDATE BOSTON-AREA CLIMATE PROJECTIONS PERIODICALLY
The City should establish the Greater Boston Panel on Climate (GBPC) to serve as the continuation of the Boston Research Advisory Group (BRAG), which developed the Climate Projection Consensus for Climate Ready Boston. The GBPC should consist of leading climate scientists from local and regional institutions, organized into working groups
focused on key climate factors, such as extreme temperatures, sea level rise, coastal storms, and precipitation.
The GBPC should be charged with two responsibilities. First, the GBPC should produce
an updated set of climate projections for the Boston area every five years, building on the 2016 Climate Projection Consensus. These projections should reflect the most up-to-date data and theoretical understanding and include consideration of multiple emissions scenarios and time periods, extending at least 100 years in the future. As part of the process of developing climate projections, the GBPC also should fill research gaps in local climate change knowledge. Second, the GBPC should assist local and state agencies in applying those conclusions
to policy, design, and regulation. In particular,
the GBPC should provide information to the Infrastructure Coordination Committee to support the development of planning and design standards (see Initiative 6-1, p.118), and to the Boston Planning and Development Agency to support efforts to incorporate climate readiness into zoning standards and land-use planning (see Initiative 9-2, p.135).
The Environment Department should oversee the GBPC’s work, and the City should identify funding for the work of the GBPC.
INITIATIVE 1-2. CREATE FUTURE FLOOD MAPS TO SUPPORT PLANNING, POLICY AND REGULATION.
The City should create a set of flood maps that show the extent and depth of future flooding, possibly including indications of wave action, moving water, and channelization hazards. The future flood maps should be based on the latest climate projections from the Greater Boston Panel on Climate (GBPC; see Initiative 1-1, p. 84), as well as policy decisions regarding acceptable levels of risk. These policy decisions should be made in collaboration with local and state agencies and will require consideration of four key parameters:
◦ Emissions scenario. The GBPC will create climate projections for multiple greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Future flood maps should reflect a decision regarding which emissions scenario is the most appropriate
to use for planning, policy, and regulation. For example, a decision to use the business- as-usual scenario would mean setting a lower level of acceptable risk and more stringent regulatory standards than a decision to use the moderate-reduction emissions scenario.
◦ Projection likelihood. Each emissions scenario includes a range of likely outcomes for sea level rise and other climate factors. Future flood maps should reflect a decision about which outcome from within this range should be used. For example, the median projection of sea level rise has a 50 percent chance of being exceeded; a stricter standard may require that the sea level rise assumption used should have at most a 15 percent chance of being exceeded.
◦ Appropriate time periods. The GBPC will create climate projections for multiple time periods. Future flood maps should reflect multiple time periods, corresponding to decisions regarding the minimum expected
◦
life of buildings and infrastructure. This
is critical for planning, designing, and regulating for the flood risk an asset will face during its expected life, rather than just the risk that it faces today. For example, in its Climate Change Preparedness Checklist, the Boston Planning and Development Agency currently assumes that large buildings in Boston have a design life of at least 60 years.
Flood probabilities. Future flood maps should show the extents and depths of various probabilities of flooding. These multiple probabilities will support decisions regarding acceptable levels of risk. For example, an infrastructure agency may decide that a local road serving a very
small area should face no more than a 1in 100 annual chance of inundation during its useful life, while a major artery or evacuation route should face no more than a 1 in 1,000 annual chance of inundation.
 84 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Local and state agencies, with guidance from
the Environment Department, should use the resulting flood maps for planning, policy, and regulations. For example, the Infrastructure Coordination Committee should incorporate them into planning and design standards (see Initiative 6-1, p.118), and the Boston Planning and Development Agency should use them for setting appropriate zoning standards within the future floodplain (see Initiative 6-1, p.118).
In conjunction with the work of the GBPC, the City should update future flood maps every five years, reflecting updated climate projections, ongoing policy decisions regarding acceptable levels of risk, and changes in the natural and built environment.
 CASE STUDY: NEW YORK CITY PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
In 2008, Mayor Bloomberg convened the New York City Panel on Climate Change, an independent body of scientists, to develop localized climate projections. In September 2012, the New York City Council passed Local Law 42, which requires the NPCC to meet at least two times per calendar year to review the most recent scientific data on climate change and its potential impacts on New York City. The NPCC is required to release updated local climate change projections at least every three years, with the last set of projections released in 2015.
 CLIMATE READY BOSTON’S FUTURE FLOOD MAPS
Climate Ready Boston produced maps that reflect future conditions for three sea level rise scenarios
(9, 21, and 36 inches) for the purpose of conducting high-level assessments of flood risk and developing climate resilience initiatives. These scenarios are not necessarilythe appropriate ones for detailed planning and regulation.
STANDARDS FOR ACCEPTABLE FLOOD RISK LEVELS
FEDERAL FLOOD RISK MANAGEMENT STANDARD
In January 2015, President Obama signed Executive Order 13690, which established national flood risk standards for
all federally funded projects in and near floodplains. Under the order, federally funded projects must adhere to one of three standards. They can use projections informed by the best available data and methods, build two feet above the current 1 percent annual chance flood elevation for standard projects and three feet above for critical buildings like hospitals and evacuation centers, or build to the 0.2 percent annual chance flood elevation.
DUTCH FLOOD RISK MANAGEMENT STANDARD
The Netherlands government recently revised flood risk management standards for national flood defenses. The new standards are based on the level of protection required to provide a basic level of safety for people behind flood defenses and to minimize severe economic losses. For flood defense systems to be considered to provide a basic level of safety, the individual annual risk of dying due to flooding at a particular location must no higher than 1 in 100,000, taking into consideration evacuation possibilities. The economically efficient level of protection is that which minimizes the sum of expected damages and required protection investments. Where one of the two standards (basic safety and economic efficiency) leads to a higher
level of protection, the stricter standard is used.
Sources: “Federal Flood Risk Management Standards.” FEMA. http://www.fema. gov/federal-flood-risk-management-standard-ffrms.
H. van der Most, I. Tanczos, K. M. de Brujin, and D. Wagenaar. “New Risk-Based Standards for Flood Protection in the Netherlands.” Paper Presented at the Sixth International Conference on Flood Management, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 2014.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 85

  Layer 2
PREPARED AND CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
86 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Climate Resilience Initiatives 87

 Boston residents,
businesses, institutions, and community groups are essential partners in climate adaptation, given their role as the day-to- day stewards of Boston’s neighborhoods.
In preparing for climate change, the City will work closely with these groups to learn from their local expertise, identify and incorporate their adaptation-planning priorities, overcome challenges to successful adaptation, and partner in planning efforts. Throughout both adaptation planning and implementation efforts, the City will engage in two-way communication with residents, businesses, institutions, and community partners, wherein it is actively engaged in both sharing and receiving information.
The City will connect with residents through a variety of methods and channels, with
a special focus on ensuring that it reaches socially vulnerable populations. Recognizing Boston’s large population of renters and students, the City will make a strong effort
to connect these groups with information and resources and engage them in planning efforts. The City will provide pathways for residents to participate in climate-related volunteering efforts, such as the Boston Medical Reserve Company, and to take part in Resilience Area Planning Committees.
To conduct effective outreach to Boston’s population, City agencies will partner with
a broad range of resilience-focused nonprofits, business groups, community development corporations, and other community-based organizations.
Building on its commitment to inclusive growth, the City will use its climate adaptation efforts as a tool to enable
more residents to fully participate in Boston’s economy. Where possible, the City will link
resilience investments to investments in housing, transportation, open space, job growth, and neighborhood services in order to increase safety, economic opportunity, and livability
for all residents. Because resilience improvements may increase property values and thereby potentially affect affordability
for residents, the City, led by the Office of Resilience and Racial Equity, will work to address these impacts by developing a resilience and racial equity toolkit. This toolkit can be used to evaluate policies and practices in order to make sure that racial equity and social cohesion form the foundation of the City’s decision-making processes.
Strategy 2: Expand education and engagement of Bostonians about climate hazards.
INITIATIVE 2-1. EXPAND CITYWIDE CLIMATE READINESS EDUCATION AND ENGAGEMENT CAMPAIGN
The City should leverage its existing emergency preparedness and climate adaptation outreach efforts to develop and implement a long-term education campaign targeted to all Bostonians with a special focus on socially vulnerable populations. In the short term, the City’s education campaign should focus on sharing the results and implications of Climate Ready Boston with all Boston residents. In the intermediate and longer term, the campaign should support both individual climate preparedness efforts and neighborhood engagement in district-scale climate adaptation planning through the Local Climate Resilience Committees (see Initiative 4-2, p.102).
This education campaign should be coordinated by a consortium of partners within the City. The consortium can include Greenovate Boston
and the Environment Department, the Office
of Emergency Management, the Boston Public Health Commission, the Office of Neighborhood Services, the Office of Resilience and Racial Equity, the Boston Planning and Development Agency, the Inspectional Services Department, and the Department of Neighborhood Development. The consortium should partner with a broad range of resilience-focused nonprofits, business groups, local community development corporations, local small businesses, and other community-based organizations.
The consortium can act as a coordinating committee for all outreach related to Climate Ready Boston. The consortium should perform
two functions. First, it should coordinate both the independent citywide education campaign and the more targeted campaigns that will be undertaken for specific groups, including property owners
(see Initiative 2-2, p.90), small businesses (see Initiative 2-3, p.92), and facilities serving vulnerable populations. For example, the Office of Emergency Management runs the “Ready Boston” community preparedness campaign that takes an all-hazards approach (natural or manmade) to informing the public about the risks that they face and what
they can do to protect themselves. Second, the consortium will identify opportunities to integrate resilience into existing education campaigns. Across both of these functions, the consortium will ensure integrated and coordinated messaging.
In the short term, the consortium can lead the development of print and online materials in multiple languages and coordinate in-person
and social media outreach. The materials should summarize the key findings from Climate Ready Boston, focusing on Boston’s three major climate hazards: coastal and riverine flooding, stormwater flooding, and extreme heat. The materials should clearly explain the risks that Boston faces, the time frames over which the city faces them, and the
 88 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 DIGITAL EQUITY AND ENGAGEMENT
High-speed Internet infrastructure is a tool that all Bostonians need to engage in the educational, economic, and civic pursuits that are critical to a future of equity and opportunity. The City is committed to providing Bostonians with access to high-speed Internet, along with the skills and tools to leverage this technology, to build the individual, family, and community capacity necessary for preparedness. To this end, the City is
taking the following steps to support digital equity and engagement:
• The City is expanding the availability of high-speed Internet in places where Bostonians work, learn, play, and engage in civic life, including Boston Public Library branches, Boston Centers for Youth and Families, Boston Public Schools, Main Streets districts, and other important public gathering places.
• The City is working to ensure that community members and local businesses are equipped with the digital
tools and skills that they need to take advantage of opportunities and create the future of Boston. City agencies and local nonprofit organizations, such as Tech Goes Home, are collaborating to offer one-time and ongoing digital-skills training, such as basic computer and Internet use, coding, and media production.
• The City is working to support a more competitive broadband marketplace so that households and businesses can choose among a range of high-
quality, affordable high-speed Internet options. The
City is facilitating collaboration across departments
to streamline permitting for broadband infrastructure, support innovative technology during the design and construction of Boston’s built environment, and remove building-level barriers to broadband access and choice.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 89

 potential impacts of those risks on Boston’s people, property, infrastructure, and economy. In the
long term, the campaign should seek to increase both the emergency and long-term preparedness of Bostonians, both by building out a network
of climate readiness volunteers and preparing Bostonians to engage district-scale climate adaptation planning through Resilience Area Planning Committees (see Initiative 4-2, p.102).
To build out a network of climate-readiness volunteers, the City can tap into the existing Boston Medical Reserve Company (BMRC). BMRC is a citywide volunteer group that receives funding through the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and is coordinated by
the Boston Public Health Commission’s Office
of Public Health Preparedness. It trains both medical and nonmedical community members
in emergency and long-term preparedness. Climate-readiness volunteers can help support both on-the-ground responses to acute events, such as assisting neighbors during heat waves and proactively reporting stormwater flooding in their communities, and longer-term adaptation—for example, by helping care for young trees to expand the urban canopy.
INITIATIVE 2-2. LAUNCH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS AND USERS
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program to inform property owners and other groups about current and future climate risks facing their buildings and actions they can undertake to increase their preparedness. This education program will be connected to, but also distinct from, the citywide education campaign because of its specific focus on building readiness. It should be linked to building audit and retrofit financing programs (see Initiative 10-1, p.138).
While the Climate Ready Buildings Education Program will focus on property owners, it also will include outreach to three other groups who play
a critical role in the use or upgrading of Boston’s building stock:
◦ Tenants, given that the majority of Boston residents are renters and they have the capacity to advocate for resilience upgrades;
◦ Developers with projects in the pipeline; and
◦ Design, construction, and property management professionals required for the construction or retrofitting of resilient buildings.
The Climate Ready Buildings Education campaign should be led by the Boston Planning and Development Agency, the Inspectional Services Department, and the Department of Neighborhood Development (DND). These entities can do outreach to property owners at key touchpoints. For all owners, these points include when they seek development approvals and permits from the Boston Planning and Development Authority and Inspectional Services Department and when they are subject to code enforcement from the Inspectional Services Department. In addition, the City should use outreach to property owners conducted as part
of Boston’s Community Rating System application (see Initiative 11-2, p.145). Finally, some additional touchpoints by specific owner type
are summarized in the table.
The campaign should share print and online resources and potentially include in-person workshops with property owners and other stakeholders. The purpose of the campaign is to build a prepared community of building owners and users across Boston, recognizing the need for broad awareness, because owners and tenants turn over relatively quickly in Boston. The campaign should perform the following functions:
◦ Educate stakeholders about buildings at risk from climate change hazards over different time periods, taking into account both direct impacts to buildings and indirect impacts to supporting services.
◦ Inform building owners about the timing and severity of their exposure and the risk levels to which they should be planning. Ideally, this would involve providing owners with information about not only flood depths but also wave heights and moving-water hazards, and also the effects of heat, because these factors affect appropriate adaptation strategies.
 PROPERTY OWNER TYPE
 TOUCHPOINT
 Large commercial property owners
Market-rate multifamily residential owners
Affordable multifamily residential owners
Owner-occupants, especially low-to moderate-income owner-occupants
Owners of small business space
Their participation in industry groups (e.g., NAIOP Commercial Real Estate Development Association, Greater Boston Real Estate Board, A Better City, and Urban Land Institute).
Required registration of their rental property through DND. Their participation in industry groups.
Their application for housing development or rehabilitation financing from DND. Their coordination with community development corporations.
Their participation in homeownership counseling or application for rehabilitation financing through DND’s Boston Home Center and in partnership with local CDCs.
Their application for capital upgrade assistance through Main Streets program.
◦ Inform building owners about the need
to make both operational changes (e.g., developing continuity of operations and evacuation plans and securing adequate insurance) and physical upgrades to improve resilience. In addition,
◦ Inform building owners about opportunities to combine climate mitigation and adaptation by making energy-efficiency improvements to their buildings. This may include solar power generation or design elements such as high-
          90 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 91
SUPPORTING INDIVIDUAL FINANCIAL PREPAREDNESS
The out-of-pocket costs associated with an acute event, such as coastal flooding that temporarily displaces residents from their homes and prevents them from accessing nonsalaried jobs, can be a significant stress for low- and moderate-income households. Today, 46 percent of Boston’s residents are liquid- asset poor, meaning that they do not have enough savings to live above the poverty level for three months if they suffer an income disruption such as losing a job.
For this reason, the City should continue to support low-
income households in both saving for emergencies and doing long-term asset building through the efforts of the Office of Financial Empowerment (OFE). For example, as one tool to build preparedness, OFE can continue to promote use of
myRA federal savings accounts to residents during its financial counseling, financial-literary education, and tax preparation assistance sessions. The myRA program offers free retirement savings accounts to households without access to an Individual Roth Account (IRA) or 401(k) account who make less than $191,000 per year. While deposited funds can be withdrawn from accounts at any time without penalty, accrued interest can only be withdrawn once the account holder reaches the age of 59. By enabling Bostonians to save for retirement but also be able to access funds in the event of an emergency, myRA accounts can potentially serve as a useful tool to advance preparedness goals.
Source: “Financial Insecurity in Boston: A Data Profile,” Family Assets Count.
 EXISTING PARTNERSHIPS WITH PROPERTY OWNERS
The City can leverage its existing experience working with property owners to educate them about climate change mitigation and adaptation challenges. Since November 2013, the Boston Planning and Development Authority has required all development projects subject to Article 80 large project review (50,000 square feet and over) to analyze and describe their climate preparedness.

 OUTREACH THROUGH
PROACTIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
The City should conduct outreach to
private property owners about two relatively inexpensive actions that can reduce their flooding risk.
• Installation and maintenance of backflow preventers: The Massachusetts Uniform State Plumbing Code requires backflow preventers to be installed for all buildings with plumbing fixtures located below
the manhole cover serving the building (i.e., with any kind of water connection below street level). These preventers
stop contaminated sewage from flowing back into a building’s systems during sewage overflow events. However, current compliance rates for both installation and maintenance are estimated to be low.
• Installation and maintenance of tide gates on private storm drain outfalls: BWSC controls the majority of public storm drain outfalls in Boston, but does not control private storm drain outfalls that run from private properties to the ocean or other waterways, such as the Charles River, Neponset River, and Fort Point Channel. BWSC estimates that there are approximately 1,000 private outfalls in Boston. They have completed mapping of all private outfalls along Fort Point Channel, although other outfalls still need to be identified through fieldwork done at low tide. With sea level rise, outfalls that lie at low elevations along waterways subject to tidal influence will need to be tide-gated to prevent them from backing up and flooding the buildings or sites that they serve.
92 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
reflectance “cool roofs” that can reduce property owners’ cooling costs while also reducing the urban heat island effect.
◦ Educate building owners about how they can participate in district-scale adaptation planning efforts, including larger-scale flood defenses that potentially could reduce the need for individual defenses, while also providing education about site-specific mitigation to support multiple layers of protection.
INITIATIVE 2-3. CONDUCT OUTREACH
TO FACILITIES THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS TO SUPPORT PREPAREDNESS AND ADAPTATION
As a separate effort, but closely linked to its Climate Ready Buildings campaign, the City should conduct outreach to owners and operators of privately owned facilities that serve significant concentrations of vulnerable populations but that are not currently required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans under state and local regulations. The purpose of this outreach should be to encourage the owners and operators of these facilities to develop operational preparedness and evacuation plans for situations in which sheltering in place is not feasible, as well as to make needed capital upgrades.
Under current regulations, municipal facilities and healthcare facilities (hospitals, healthcare clinics, and nursing homes) licensed by the Massachusetts Bureau of Healthcare Quality are already required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans. The City can work with local community development corporations to identify facilities for outreach, with target facilities likely to include privately owned affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment centers, daycare facilities, food pantries, small nonprofit offices, and others. The City should encourage facility managers to use planning resources provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to develop continuity of operations plans. The City should also prioritize these facilities for climate resilience audits (see Initiative 10-1, p.138) and backup power installation (see Initiative 10-3, p.143).
INITIATIVE 2-4. UPDATE THE CITY’S HEAT EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN
Because the frequency and intensity of heat waves are expected to increase with climate change, the City should continue its efforts to update its heat emergency action plan to reflect both current and likely future needs. The City’s action plan lies within the City’s Emergency Operations Plan Annex on Extreme Temperatures.
The revised action plan should enhance the framework for coordination during heat events across the City, state agencies, and nonprofit partners critical to preparedness and response. Key state agencies include the Department of Conservation and Recreation, which owns and operates public pools, and the Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority, which operates THE RIDE fleet. The revised plan should ensure that there is a clear set of roles and responsibilities for each partner and define the actions to be undertaken under both heat advisory and heat emergency conditions. In addition, the plan should set a clear set of protocols for the City and
its partners to communicate with Bostonians about heat risks across a broad range of channels, including phone, radio, print, online, social media, and in- person outreach.
In addition, in the revised plan, the City should standardize its definitions for both heat advisory and heat emergency events. The Elderly Commission defines a heat emergency as three consecutive days with maximum temperature exceeding 86 degrees Fahrenheit and relative humidity exceeding 68 percent, and a heat advisory when these conditions are in effect for one or two days. The Mayor’s Office currently defines a heat emergency as three or more days with maximum temperature exceeding 90 degrees Fahrenheit.
In standardizing its definitions, the City should recognize that different thresholds for taking action to address heat risks may be appropriate for different populations.
In addition, the City should partner with community nonprofits to expand access to facilities with cooling capacity in areas that currently have limited access to municipally owned emergency shelter facilities
or that have access only to pool facilities, which are not suitable for the elderly, medically ill, or small children. The City should prioritize installation of backup power at shelter facilities to reduce their
risk of losing cooling capacity during heat waves (see Initiative 10-2, p.142). The City also should
refine its existing systems to provide transportation to facilities with cooling capacity for older adults
and disabled people, with these systems including using the Elderly Commission’s Senior Shuttles
and MBTA’s THE RIDE fleet. The City should partner with community nonprofits and healthcare providers to help disabled residents who lack cooling capacity in their homes register for THE RIDE, if interested, in advance of heat events. In addition, the City should work with the MBTA to reduce the time required for reservations during heat emergencies so that the reservation period is not a barrier to usage.
 Climate Resilience Initiatives 93

            The City may need to partner with the MBTA to identify additional resources to support this type of service. To serve physically homebound people who cannot leave their homes without assistance, the City should work to help them obtain energy-efficient air conditioners or other means of cooling.
To take advantage of the important role that strong peer-to-peer relationships and community ties play in reducing negative health impacts during heat waves, the City should make heat a major focus of its citywide education and engagement campaign (see Initiative 2-1, p. 88). Communications should help Bostonians understand heat health risks, heat illness symptoms, cooling center locations and hours, and available transportation and emergency services. In addition, as part of its citywide campaign, the City should work to establish a network of neighborhood-level volunteers who
can check on socially vulnerable populations,
such as seniors, the disabled, and the homeless, during heat waves. The City can leverage existing volunteer networks, such as the Boston Medical Reserve Company, and community nonprofits to help build out these networks. In addition, as part of its outreach to owners and operators of facilities serving concentrations of vulnerable populations, the City should encourage them to educate their clients about heat risks (see Initiative 2-3, p.92). The City can encourage nutrition vendors, home care agencies, and visiting nurses to increase phone and in-person check-ins during heat events.
Finally, the City should work with its partners (state agencies and nonprofits) to improve tracking of the need for public heat support services in Boston to evaluate if services are keeping pace with demand. These metrics include emergency shelter usage, transportation requests, and healthcare service requests. Under a separate set of initiatives (see Strategy 6, p.118), the City will prioritize green infrastructure development in areas that are subject to the urban heat island effect and have high levels of air pollution and socially vulnerable populations.
INITIATIVE 2-5. EXPAND BOSTON’S SMALL BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
Small businesses play a critical role in employing Boston residents and driving the Boston economy, with 44 percent of Boston’s employees in private, for-profit businesses working in small businesses.1 Because small businesses face challenges in preparing for and recovering from climate change impacts, the City should launch a preparedness program to increase their readiness. The City should leverage the strong existing relationships that it has with small businesses through its
Main Streets and Renew Boston Small Business programs to launch Small Business Preparedness Program. The program should be targeted towards small businesses that are exposed to coastal and riverine or stormwater flooding in the near term, because of the potential for physical damage, focusing particularly on Main Streets districts that are exposed under these conditions. The program also should provide information on heat risks.
As part of this effort, the City can facilitate in- person workshops to help small business owners increase their preparedness in five ways:
◦ Better understand their risks from climate hazards, including coastal and stormwater flooding and extreme heat.
◦ Develop business continuity plans.
◦ Evaluate whether they have adequate
insurance coverage.
◦ If they own their space, prioritize necessary physical upgrades for their specific building.
◦ If they do not own their space, communicate the importance of resilience improvements to property owners.
As needed, the City should partner with the insurance community in Boston to address barriers
1Source: “Small Business Plan.” City of Boston
to insurance coverage to small businesses. The City is undertaking a separate set of initiatives
to address insurance availability and cost under Strategy 11 (see p.145). Finally, the City should
help connect small business owners and, as relevant, their landlords with the resilience audit program (see Initiative 10-1, p.138). Because cost is a major barrier to making resilience improvements, the City should investigate funding models for building-level resilience improvements under Initiative 10-4 (see p.143).
Strategy 3: Leverage climate adaptation as a tool for economic development
INITIATIVE 3-1. IDENTIFY RESILIENCE- FOCUSED WORKFORCE-DEVELOPMENT PATHWAYS
The Office of Workforce Development can explore developing required skill profiles for resilience-focused jobs at a range of skill levels, based on Boston’s planned resilience initiatives. For example, potential resilience-focused jobs may include performing resilience audits of buildings and installing and maintaining green infrastructure. To prepare Bostonians for these
jobs and create a pipeline of local workers prepared to undertake resilience projects, the Office of Workforce Development then should create a
plan to incorporate resilience skills development into Boston’s existing job-training programs and establish resilience-focused workforce-development pathways. The Office of Workforce Development also should work to incorporate resilience retrofit skills training into its existing construction pre- apprenticeship and apprenticeship training programs.
INITIATIVE 3-2. PURSUE INCLUSIVE HIRING AND LIVING WAGES FOR RESILIENCE PROJECTS
The City can consider the hiring of graduates
of Boston’s resilience workforce-development programs for firms working on resilience projects that receive City funding or land. In addition, the City can explore whether City-sponsored resilience projects can pay employees a prevailing or a living wage to support economic opportunity for all Bostonians. Under the initiatives set out in Imagine Boston 2030, the City is advocating for a higher minimum wage to improve economic mobility for Boston workers and help ensure that all Boston residents are able to earn a family-sustaining wage.
 MAYOR MARTIN J. WALSH, CITY OF BOSTON
                USING CLIMATE INVESTMENTS TO ADVANCE EQUITYEQUITY
In the coming years, the public, private, and nonprofit sectors will be making large investments in climate mitigation and adaptation. Earlier this year, the City released its Economic Inclusion
and Equity Agenda, which provides a detailed overview of the City’s ongoing programs, policies, and initiatives to address racial and economic disparities in Boston. The agenda provides context for the City’s work across four themes: income and employment, wealth creation, business development, and economic mobility. To fulfill
its commitment to inclusive growth, the City should undertake the initiatives under Strategy 3 to ensure that these investments yield maximum benefits to residents in terms of job creation, workforce development, and entrepreneurship opportunities.
 BOSTON’S EXISTING RESIDENT JOB POLICY
City agencies should leverage the existing Boston Resident Job Policy to increase
resident employment on City-sponsored development projects and support equity
in hiring and contracting. Under this policy, developers and contractors agree to make best-faith efforts to employ 50 percent residents, 25 percent people of color, and 10 percent women across all trades.
    94 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 95

  INITIATIVE 3-3. PRIORITIZE USE OF MINORITY- AND WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESSES FOR RESILIENCE PROJECTS
The City can request that City-sponsored resilience projects prioritize minority and women-owned businesses for spending
on capital and operating and maintenance
costs. The Mayor’s 2016 Executive Order on Procurement set spending goals for minority and women-owned business enterprises (MBE and WBE, respectively) competing for City construction, architecture, engineering, and professional services contracts.2 The spending goals, which range from 10 to 25 percent MBE and 15 to 20 percent WBE utilization, depending on the type and size of the contracts, can be applied to all City-sponsored resilience projects.
2 “An Interim Executive Order Promoting Equity in Public Procurement.” Executive Order of Mayor Martin J. Walsh, 2016.
  96 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
MAIN STREETS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM MODELS
For the Main Streets Preparedness Program, the
City can draw on precedents from both within and outside the Boston metro. The Metropolitan Area Planning Commission has been working with the City of Cambridge to assist Cambridge’s small businesses in recovering quickly from business disruption. New York City’s Business Preparedness and Resiliency Program (BPREP) offers resilience planning workshops, building assessments, grants for building retrofits, and online tools for assessing vulnerability and potential adaptation strategies.
Source:“Business Preparedness and Resiliency Program (PREP).” The City of New York.
Climate Ready Boston / Boston Harbor Now Workshop
BOSTON’S EXISTING WORKFORCE- DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
The Office of Workforce Development can leverage a number of existing workforce-development programs
to explore providing the infrastructure for climate resilience-focused job training. In particular, the Office
of Workforce Development can use the framework of
the Greater Boston American Apprenticeship Initiative, which includes the Building Pathways and YouthBuild programs, to offer construction pre-apprenticeship
and apprenticeship opportunities. The Greater Boston Apprenticeship Initiative was launched in the fall of
2015 with a U.S. Department of Labor grant. Building Pathways is a six-week pre-apprenticeship program run by the Metropolitan Boston Building and Construction Trades Council that provides women and people of color with an introduction to careers in the building trades, gives them the opportunity to earn key certifications,
and provides them with guaranteed placement into an apprenticeship program. YouthBuild Boston is a 12-week pre-apprenticeship program to youth ages 14–24 that offers them the opportunity to earn key certifications
in preparation for building trades apprenticeships. The Office of Workforce Development also can explore incorporating resilience skills development into the Mayor’s Youth Summer Jobs Program and Operation Exit, an intensive career-readiness and occupational skills training program that prepares at-risk youth and young adults for buildings trades apprenticeships.
 EMERGENCY SHELTERS
The City and community organizations currently operate many facilities throughout Boston that offer cooling capacity during heat waves. The City will work with community organizations to ensure that these facilities are open whenever necessary, accessible to all who need them, and feature backup power in case of power outages.
 PRECEDENT: CITY OF NEW ORLEANS WORKFORCE-DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
In recent years, New Orleans has become
a national leader in resilience workforce development, and is poised to extend this
role through its winning project under the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s National Disaster Resilience Competition, “Reshaping the Urban Delta.” New Orleans’s program offers several useful best practices for Boston:
• Defining short-term and long-term workforce- development objectives. New Orleans has committed to both train unemployed and underemployed working-age individuals
for job readiness in the short term and develop the next generation of design and construction professionals in the long term. It has set a target that over 10 percent
of resilience project jobs will be filled by unemployed or underemployed individuals.
• Developing a clear set of workforce- development pathways. New Orleans has prioritized environmental services and water- management-sector workforce development. It has elected to focus on these sectors because they have both local demand and export potential.
• Incentivizing firms to exceed workforce- development targets. When bidding
out contracts, New Orleans encourage respondents to exceed Section 3 training and hiring requirements for low- or very-low- income residents by making the additional costs incurred to provide extra training eligible for reimbursement as long as they are deemed reasonable.
• Supporting workforce-development accountability. New Orleans has implemented a rigorous tracking system
to ensure that workforce-development graduates hired by contractors are receiving pledged training and employment opportunities.
Source:“City of New Orleans Application to HUD National Disaster Resilience Competition.” City of New Orleans, 2015.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 97

    Layer 3 PROTECTED
SHORES
98 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Climate Resilience Initiatives 99

 Strategy 4: Develop local climate resilience plans to coordinate adaptation efforts
INITIATIVE 4-1. DEVELOP LOCAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE PLANS TO SUPPORT DISTRICT- SCALE CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The City should develop local climate resilience plans to address climate adaptation in areas of geographically concentrated climate risks. The priority local climate resilience plans should be for East Boston, Downtown, Charlestown, South Boston, and Dorchester, which face the greatest risk from coastal flooding in the near term. For these and subsequent local climate resilience plans, all climate hazards should be addressed, including coastal and riverine flooding, extreme heat, and stormwater flooding.
Local climate resilience plans should coordinate all climate adaptation efforts within a district. This would allow the City and its partners to use limited resources more wisely and avoid the duplication of investments, not only in capital projects but also in planning, design, and operations. District coordination also
offers opportunities for the City or its partners
to capture some or all of the value created by climate readiness efforts in order to finance these investments and to integrate other community priorities—such as housing affordability, economic opportunity, access to quality open space, and safe and efficient mobility—in tandem with climate adaptation. At the district scale, climate readiness efforts can be integrated with locally specific initiatives to advance multiple goals simultaneously.
The local climate resilience plans should include the following:
◦ Community Engagement (see Initiative 4-2, p.102). To understand current challenges facing residents, businesses, and institutions and to develop creative solutions to address these challenges, the City should work with district stakeholders through local climate resilience committees. Representative of their neighborhoods, these committees should gather data, provide input on potential resilience actions, and identify potential co-benefits of climate adaptation such as increased access to economic opportunity for an improved public realm. Engagement with the local climate resilience committees should be a feature of all components of local climate resilience plans.
◦ Land Use Planning for Future Flood Protection Systems (see Initiative 5-1, p. 106). To support the feasibility of district-scale flood protection systems, the Boston Planning and Development Agency should establish Flood Protection Overlay Districts in strategically important “breach points” where floodwaters can enter and inundate large inland areas.
New development proposals at these breach points would need to demonstrate the potential for integration into future flood protection systems. This is particularly important in areas where waterfront development is currently proceeding rapidly and may introduce new challenges for the creation of future flood protection infrastructure.
◦ Flood Protection Feasibility Studies (see Initiatives 5-2, 5-3, pp. 106, 110). The City should apply a consistent framework for evaluating the feasibility of district-scale flood protection alternatives. Key considerations include flood risk reduction benefits; additional benefits like recreation or economic development; environmental impacts; cost; land ownership; permitting; and intergovernmental coordination.
◦ Infrastructure Adaptation Planning (see Initiative 6-1, p.118). The City should work with the Infrastructure Coordination Committee to develop district-scale infrastructure adaptation plans to prepare existing infrastructure—and design new infrastructure—for climate change. This may include opportunities for joint capital planning, such as the elevation of a road combined with upgrades to the stormwater management system or coordination with district-scale flood protection infrastructure.
◦ Coordination with Other Plans (see Initiative 9-5, p.138). The City should coordinate with other planning processes such as Imagine Boston 2030, 100 Resilient Cities, Special Planning Areas, or Municipal Harbor Plans to ensure that district-scale climate adaptation
is incorporated into area plans and, where appropriate, codified into the Zoning Code.
◦ Development of Financing Strategies.
The City should evaluate and, as necessary, provide implementation support for financing strategies to support district-scale adaptation. The strategies may include federal and state infrastructure funds, special assessment districts, resilience business improvement districts or joint capital planning structures
to collect funds from the beneficiaries of adaptation projects. Assessment districts could help the City to fund capital and operating expenses for district-scale resilience investments by levying a small tax on the properties that benefit. Joint capital planning among agencies and other actors could enable larger-scale interventions that reduce the need for individual interventions and pool resources from the agencies that benefit from the large-scale interventions.
◦ Development of Governance Structures. The City should evaluate and, as necessary, provide implementation support for
governance structures for managing the implementation, operations, and maintenance of adaptation actions. These governance structures may include formation of a
special assessment district governing board, resilience business improvement district, or public-private partnership. The form of the governance structures should be guided by the type and financing needs of resilience actions to be undertaken.
100 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 101
  LOCAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE PLANS FOR DISTRICT-SCALE ADAPTATION
The City should develop local climate resilience plans for East Boston, Downtown, Charlestown, South Boston, and Dorchester, which face the greatest risk of geographically concentrated coastal flooding. For these and subsequent local climate resilience plans, all climate hazards should be addressed, including coastal and riverine flooding, extreme heat, and stormwater flooding, as should additional community priorities.

INITIATIVE 4-2. ESTABLISH LOCAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE COMMITTEES
TO SERVE AS LONG-TERM COMMUNITY PARTNERS FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The City should work with local residents, businesses, and institutions in each resilience planning area to form a local climate resilience committee to help guide district-scale climate adaptation activities (see Initiative 4-1, p.100). The committees should help identify local challenges and develop creative solutions, ensure that other local initiatives—such as economic development or open space planning—are integrated with climate adaptation, and steward the ongoing adaptation process over time.
Local climate resilience committees may take a variety of forms and may have multiple missions depending on the needs of each neighborhood and other planning and development initiatives. A committee may be staffed by a community-based organization with a long-term presence in the area and the capacity to work productively with local residents and public agencies. The committees should help to disseminate information about climate-related risks and gather feedback on
local residents’ priorities for climate adaptation. The development of these local climate resilience committees should fit within Greenovate’s existing efforts to establish a climate action network.
Strategy 5: Create a coastal protection system
As discussed in the Climate Ready Boston Vulnerability Assessment, Boston faces significant and increasing coastal flood risk due to a combination of sea level rise, high tides, and coastal storm events. A key component of the multilayered strategy for addressing this risk is to create a robust system of coastal protection infrastructure that responds to community needs and ecological dynamics.
There are generally three categories of coastal protection:
1. “Gray,” or hard-engineered coastal infrastructure, such as levees, floodwalls, or gates. Typically, gray coastal infrastructure
is necessary to protect built-up areas from severe flood events like coastal storms, as it is designed to be strong enough to withstand coastal forces and high enough to reduce risk from storm surge.
2. “Green,” or nature-based, coastal infrastructure, such as wetlands or living shorelines. Green coastal infrastructure alone is typically most appropriate for protecting against chronic flooding events like future high tide or minor storms, rather than severe coastal storm events. This is because it is
 PRECEDENT: CLIMATE CARE COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION MODEL
The Climate CARE (Community Action for Resilience through Engagement) program in East Boston is being led by the Neighborhood of Affordable Housing (NOAH), with funding from the Kresge Foundation. The program consists
of two major components. First, it employs
local residents as “Climate Canvassers” to educate East Boston residents about current and future climate risks in a multiyear outreach effort. Second, it brings together local residents, public-sector entities conducting adaptation planning, and planning, design, and engineering experts in working groups to discuss community input and priorities, with the goal
of developing a set of pilot design projects. Climate CARE builds on earlier work done by NOAH and the University of Massachusetts- Boston and the University of New Hampshire, with funding from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. NOAH and its partners held workshops in May and June 2014 to map key assets and generate preliminary adaptation strategies, including a set of multipurpose flood barriers.
 SUMMARY OF INITIATIVES TO CREATE A COASTAL PROTECTION SYSTEM
Based on preliminary hydrological analyses, establish new overlay districts in potential flood protection system locations and require that development proposals do not prevent the future creation of flood protection infrastructure.
Determine a framework through which alternative flood protection systems would be consistently evaluated, and which is compatible with the framework used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a key implementation and funding partner.
Using a consistent evaluation framework (Initiative 5-2), study the feasibility of district-scale flood protection in a number of locations, prioritizing those that face the greatest risk.
Using a consistent evaluation framework (Initiative 5-2), study the feasibility of a Harbor-wideharbor-wide flood protection system.
#
INITIATIVE
SUMMARY
   Establish Flood Protection Overlay Districts and require potential integration with flood protection
5-1
5-2 evaluation framework for flood
  Determine a consistent protection system prioritization
  5-3 Prioritize and study the feasibility of district-scale flood protection
  5-4
Launch a feasibility study of a harbor-wide flood protection system
   EXAMPLE FLOOD PROTECTION DESIGNS
            102 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Climate Resilience Initiatives 103

unlikely to reach the elevation necessary to sufficiently reduce storm surge, even if it does dissipate wave energy and slow- moving water.
Green coastal infrastructure may feature certain advantages over gray coastal infrastructure in terms of ecological benefits, long-term adaptability, and lifetime maintenance costs. However, it can be particularly challenging to site in urban areas, since it generally has a much broader footprint than gray infrastructure and requires specific environmental conditions that foster ecological function and habitat suitability.
3. Hybrid coastal infrastructure, which incorporates both “gray” and “green” components. Examples of hybrid
infrastructure include reinforced dunes or living shorelines that contain engineered levees. These infrastructure types are designed to withstand coastal forces and storm surge during extreme events and may provide some of the benefits of green coastal infrastructure, with similar challenges for finding appropriate sites.
There are two scales of coastal protection that are possible for Boston:
1. District-scale coastal protection. These are infrastructure investments at or near the waterfront that can reduce flood risk for a specific area within Boston. In each case, some type of flood barrier would need to be constructed, connecting two points of high ground in order to reduce flood risk in low-lying areas. Generally, these defenses
would be more cost effective in narrow low- lying areas where floodwaters can enter and inundate large inland areas and less cost- effective in broad, low-lying exposed areas.
2. Harbor-wide coastal protection. These are offshore interventions in Boston Harbor that can reduce flood risk for all of Boston, as well as neighboring cities. These interventions could be used to achieve two outcomes:
○ Decreasing Boston Harbor’s tidal range. Boston Harbor’s tidal range could be lessened by narrowing or shallowing the inlets between Harbor Islands. Reducing the openings between islands acts to reduce the exchange of water and moderate the tidal range. This would effectively lower the high tide (and raise
the low tide) in the harbor, reducing tidal inundation as well as storm surge inundation.
○ Blocking storm surge. Boston could be protected from storm surge by installing a system with operable gates that could be temporarily closed during storm events to prevent storm surge from penetrating into Boston Harbor from the North Atlantic.
There may be potential solutions that would decrease Boston Harbor’s tidal range without including an operable gate to block storm surge. However, since any operable surge barrier would require construction in the harbor, such a solution would also end up decreasing the tidal range.
See Initiative 5-2 (p. 106) for further discussion of the potential implications of flood protection infrastructure.
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
 THE MULTIPLE LAYERS APPROACH
Resilient solutions are independently effective (provide benefits on their own) but can also be applied in multiple layers to increase effectiveness. This multiple-layers approach is applied to the flood protection strategy described here, where both district-scale and harbor-wide flood protection plans are advanced simultaneously.
While the pursuit of both district-scale and harbor-wide flood protection may at first seem duplicative, there are a number of reasons to pursue them in parallel:
• Time. The smaller scale of the district-scale interventions means that they would likely be less expensive, complex, and time consuming to implement than a harbor-wide intervention would be. Many Boston neighborhoods face significant coastal flood risk today and would benefit from district-scale interventions as soon as they are implemented. Even if harbor-wide and district-scale interventions were aggressively pursued, there could be a period of years or even decades between when a district solution would be operational and when a harbor-wide solution could be in place.
• Scale. The cost and complexity of a harbor-wide intervention may prevent it from ever being fully implemented.
• Co-Benefits. District-scale flood protection and harbor-wide interventions offer different opportunities for co-benefits, such as parkland, transportation infrastructure, or additional developable land.
• Negative Impacts. While the flood risk reduction benefits of a harbor-wide intervention may be far greater than those of a district-scale intervention, the potential for negative impacts on the regional ecology and economy would also be far greater.
• Risk of Failure. If a harbor-wide intervention were to fail and there were no district-scale flood protection, the results could be catastrophic. At the same time, however, district- scale interventions are also not fail-proof, as they can be overtopped. For this reason, even buildings behind flood protection structures should retrofitted or built to climate- ready standards, and communities should be prepared for severe storms.
• Regular Tidal Inundation. Some areas like South Boston and East Boston will face monthly inundation once sea level rise passes a certain threshold later this century. A harbor-wide intervention alone may not be able to prevent all tidally induced flooding, requiring a multiple-layers approach over the long term.
THE HARBOR ISLANDS AND FLOOD RISK
The Harbor Islands play an important role in mitigating tides
and wave action between the Atlantic Ocean and Boston’s shores. They slow the rate at which water can enter and exit
the harbor, decreasing the difference in elevation between high tide and low tide, and they also dissipate the energy of waves entering the harbor. As sea levels rise, the Harbor Islands are at risk of shrinking. Currently, a team of public and nonprofit partners are studying the erosion of the Islands and the potential for installing submerged breakwaters—including using materials from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ dredging of the harbor channels—to act as wave attenuators which would promote shoreline protection and possibly provide habitat for species
like eelgrass. The team includes the City of Boston, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Massachusetts Office of Coastal Zone Management and the Division of Marine Fisheries, The Nature Conservancy, and Northeastern University.
BOSTON’S EXISTING COASTAL PROTECTION STRUCTURES
In addition to flood protection provided by natural waterfront areas such as the Belle Isle Marsh, Boston is already protected by a number of manmade coastal protection structures. The Massachusetts Department of Coastal Zone Management conducted an inventory and assessment of publicly-owned coastal structures in 2015, and identified a total of 110 structures in Boston, with 18 structures in East Boston, 16 in Charlestown, 13 in Downtown Boston, 36 in South Boston, and 27 in Dorchester. Approximately $46 million in rehabilitation funds would be required to bring all structures up to an “A” condition rating, with $23 million of that required for structures that are in “D” or “F” condition. Given that well-maintained structures are necessary to provide effective protection, there is a resilience opportunity associated with restoring and upgrading Boston’s existing structures.
104 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 105

INITIATIVE 5-1. ESTABLISH FLOOD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS AND REQUIRE POTENTIAL INTEGRATION WITH FLOOD PROTECTION
The Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should petition the Boston Zoning Commission to create new Flood Protection Overlay Districts in areas that are strategically important
for potential future flood protection infrastructure. These areas are low-lying “breach points” near
the waterfront where floodwaters could enter neighborhoods and where targeted district-scale interventions could yield significant risk reduction (see Initiative 5-3, p.110). The purposes of the Flood Protection Overlay Districts are first to recognize that the rapid pace of development occurring in strategically important areas today could increase the cost and complexity of potential future district- scale flood protection, and second, to provide a regulatory mechanism to address that situation. Drawing on the findings from the Vulnerability Assessment, and specifically the locations of key inundation points, Climate Ready Boston has identified a set of potential locations for flood protection systems that could address inundation points by connecting places of high ground (see map, “Potential Flood Protection Locations,” and the Focus Areas chapter of this report).
Within a Flood Protection Overlay District, a developer would be required to submit a study of how the proposed project could be integrated into a future flood protection system; options may include raising and reinforcing the development site or providing room for a future easement across the site. The BPDA should engage in conversations with the development community to develop guidelines for such studies and determine a minimum project size for this requirement so that small projects are not unnecessarily burdened. Proposals should consider the feasibility of nature-based flood protection systems that may include dunes, landscaped berms, or created salt marshes or oyster reefs.
INITIATIVE 5-2. DETERMINE A CONSISTENT EVALUATION FRAMEWORK FOR FLOOD PROTECTION PRIORITIZATION
The City should establish a framework through which alternative district-scale and harbor-wide flood protection systems would be consistently evaluated. While this framework should be guided by local priorities, it must also be compatible with the framework used by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, who would be an indispensable partner on studying, permitting, funding, and implementing any flood protection infrastructure.
It is critical to consistently quantify the social, environmental, and economic benefits of each alternative intervention—with particular attention to social equity and the needs of socially vulnerable populations—so that they can be weighed both against the costs of the project and against each other. Any evaluation framework must compare a baseline “without project” scenario, in which flood risk continues to increase with sea level rise, to “with project” scenarios, in which flood risk is managed through appropriate interventions.
The key considerations for an evaluation framework for district-scale and harbor-wide flood protection systems include: flood risk reduction benefits; additional benefits, such as quality of life impacts; environmental impacts; cost; land ownership; permitting and regulations; and intergovernmental coordination. Each consideration is discussed further below.
◦ Flood risk reduction benefits. The primary goal of a flood protection system is to reduce the flood risk for residents, businesses, property, and infrastructure, ensuring that Boston can continue to thrive as sea levels rise.
The information in the Climate Ready Boston Vulnerability Assessment is an initial attempt at quantifying flood risk and therefore the potential for risk reduction. For example,
there are currently over 90,000 Bostonians and 12,000 buildings in the areas expected to be inundated during a 1 percent annual chance flood event under a 36-inch sea level rise scenario (2070s or later). Under this scenario, the expected economic losses3 in the City of Boston from such a flood event would be over $14.2 billion. The potential flood risk reduction benefits at specific locations are detailed in the Focus Area chapter.
These estimates only consider current people and property in Boston, and do not take
into account population growth or future development. Further studies should verify the flood risk reduction potential of multiple district-scale and harbor-wide intervention designs, considering Boston’s neighbors who also face flood risk from the harbor, as well as future city and regional growth.
○ Residual flood risk. The City must consider “residual risk,” or the risk remaining after the flood protection system is built. This includes the risk that a flood event of greater magnitude or intensity occurs than the one selected as the basis for design, as well as increased risk due to the diminished drainage capacity of the area behind the flood protection system.
○ Induced flood risk. The City must also consider potential impacts on areas outside the flood protection system, which could potentially face greater risk of flooding due to the displacement of water by the flood protection system.
3Includes direct physical damage, displacement costs, and stress factors. See Vulnerability Assessment for details.
106 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 FINANCING A FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM
Through its General Investigation Program, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) helps communities study and construct flood risk management projects. Typical feasibility studies take three years to complete, and cost up to $3 million, with costs split evenly between
the federal government and the local sponsor. If
the project is found to have federal interest and a favorable benefit-cost ratio, the federal government can fund up to 65 percent of construction costs, with the local sponsor contributing the remainder, as well
as all operations and maintenance costs. For the USACE to pursue study and construction through the General Investigation Program, Congress must provide authorization and appropriate funds. The City should work with its senators and congressional representatives to advance this agenda in Congress.
While this federal process can be extremely helpful for advancing flood protection projects, it typically takes years to even begin a feasibility study.
Given the urgency of these projects, Boston should advance studies outside of the USACE process—
but using a framework that is compatible with
USACE methodologies—to both accelerate the timeline of the studies and increase the likelihood that the USACE would eventually get involved.
This was the approach taken by six proactive Texas counties around Houston and Galveston, which
are currently funding a comprehensive flood protection study using the USACE’s process and
with the USACE engaged as reviewers. The goal is
to reach a consensus with key stakeholders and
then pass the study to the USACE, who should be able to use the study findings, model, and data for future phases to save on costs and accelerate the overall study timeline.
Even if there is significant federal financial support for a harbor-wide intervention, Boston and its neighbors would still be required to finance a large portion of the project.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 107

◦ Additional benefits. To maximize both the total benefits of a flood protection system
and its potential to generate revenue for
its own construction, design alternatives should advance other community goals in addition to flood risk reduction. For example, flood protection systems could be used to create new recreational and ecologically productive open spaces through green coastal infrastructure, new or newly protected land for residential or commercial development,
or new transportation infrastructure. There are many existing and proposed examples from around the world of flood protection being incorporated into other investments that improve quality of life in a city. Brooklyn Bridge Park, for example, was built with shoreline riprap, a constructed marsh, and lands elevated well above the floodplain, protecting the park and some inland areas from damage during Hurricane Sandy. These benefits can also help avoid, or mitigate, any negative quality of life impacts. For example, a system that requires the construction of
a vertical wall may block physical or visual access to the waterfront; a system that utilizes a landscaped berm would improve waterfront access and opportunities for recreation, education, and tourism.
◦ Environmental impacts. Any flood protection system would have both immediate and lasting impacts on the region’s complex ecosystems, including effects on water quality and coastal habitats.
In assessing environmental impacts, it is crucial to compare them to a baseline “without project” scenario in which there is no harbor- wide intervention and the sea continues to inundate land with increasing frequency. For example, a harbor-wide intervention would likely disturb Belle Isle Marsh, Neponset River, and other intertidal wetlands in the harbor by altering salinity, nutrient, and
toxin loads and other biochemical factors. However, without a harbor-wide intervention or adjacent land for these wetlands to
migrate to over time, sea level rise will more quickly convert these areas to open water
and eliminate the benefits wetlands provide. Because sea level rise will threaten key
habit areas with or without flood protection interventions, expected future environmental conditions with and without interventions need to be understood.
Although district-scale flood protection infrastructure would not have the same scale of environmental impact as a harbor-wide intervention, it would still have consequences
for local natural systems. Impacts on ecological systems, such as species habitat, and public health, such as water quality, must be studied. On the other hand, both harbor-wide and district-scale flood defenses would have some near- and long-term ecological benefits that should be further understood. For instance, baseline “without project” scenarios would include uncontrolled flooding in many urban and industrial areas, heightening Boston Harbor’s exposure to toxins. By reducing
the probability of flooding, harbor-wide and district-scale flood defenses would reduce the probability of toxic releases that would harm harbor ecosystems.
◦ Cost. The planning, design, construction, environmental mitigation, and annual operations and maintenance activities for
a coastal protection system would all require significant expenditures.
Primary cost drivers for solutions such as the harbor-wide intervention would be the large gate structures and marine walls,which would span 1.5 to 3.5 miles and require deep foundations to withstand the forces of storm events.
For district-scale defenses, cost is affected
by flood protection location and typology
and the physical and urban conditions of the location where defenses are being built. Cost considerations include the relative size of the flood protection system, its relative complexity (e.g., deployable gates across road intersections make systems much more expensive to build and operate), and opportunities to integrate flood protection with other infrastructure and redevelopment to reduce and share costs.
◦ Land ownership. Flood protection systems will likely span multiple parcels of land.
To minimize the cost and complexity of flood protection, public land should be
used wherever possible. In order for FEMA
to certify a flood protection project, which
is necessary for realizing National Flood Insurance Program savings, the project must be publicly owned and maintained. If any private land were incorporated into a project, it would require an easement to allow 24-hour access for maintenance activities. To reduce challenges associated with private ownership, especially fragmented private ownership, public parcels or rights-of-way are preferred wherever possible.
◦ Permitting and regulations. Regulations affect the feasibility of flood protection
both directly, by setting the parameters for the permitting process, and indirectly, by controlling the types of uses that can occur near the defenses and therefore the ability to raise funds from nearby properties.
As with any major water infrastructure project, a number of local, state, and federal agencies would need to approve a coastal protection system.
At the local level, the Boston Conservation Commission is the agency responsible for reviewing projects impacting wetlands, under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act.
At the state level, the Office of the
Secretary of Energy and Environmental Affairs is responsible for administering
the Massachusetts Environmental Policy
Act (MEPA), the primary environmental
law that governs major actions taken by Massachusetts governments. In addition, the state Department of Environmental Protection administers Chapter 91, the Massachusetts Public Waterfront Act, which includes requirements for public access and water- dependent uses. The MassWildlife Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program administers the Massachusetts Endangered
 Climate Resilience Initiatives 109
FLOOD RISK REDUCTION BENEFITS
As sea levels rise, the potential benefits of a harbor- wide intervention, in terms of avoided impacted people and economic losses, will increase. This table of potential flood risk reduction benefits only includes the current people and property in Boston; the actual avoided losses would be larger because they would include areas outside Boston and because the region’s population and economic activity are expected to continue to grow.
Population exposed to 1 percent annual chance flood
Estimated economic losses from a 1 percent annual chance flood
16,000
$2.3 billion
43,000
90,000
  9” SLR
(2030s-2050s)
 21” SLR
(2050s-2100s)
 36” SLR
(2070s-2100s)
  Buildings exposed to 1 percent annual chance flood
  2,000
  6,000
  12,000
  $6.2 billion
$14.2 billion
 108 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston

Species Act. Finally, the Massachusetts Office of Coastal Zone Management (CZM) would need to be involved in project review to ensure that the proposed activities are consistent with Massachusetts’s enforceable coastal program policies and to conduct a federal consistency review for any project requiring federal permitting or funding.
At the federal level, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers would likely lead coordination with other federal agencies, including the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Environmental Protection Agency. Regulators would consider project impacts on the natural environment, historic and cultural resources, and the navigability of Boston Harbor by commercial and recreational vessels.
◦ Coordination with other municipalities
and government entities. Harbor-wide
and district-scale interventions are likely to require close collaboration with neighboring cities and towns, such as Cambridge, Chelsea, Winthrop, and Quincy, as well as the state and regional agencies.
INITIATIVE 5-3. PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
Applying a consistent evaluation framework
(see Initiative 5-2, p.106), the City should study the feasibility of district-scale flood protection in a number of locations and prioritize them based on costs and benefits to populations, businesses, property, and infrastructure. For more details on potential flood protection locations, including a discussion of order-of-magnitude benefits that could be realized from each, see the Focus Areas chapter and Appendix of this report. These feasibility studies should take place in the context of local climate resilience plans (see Initiative
4-1, p.100), featuring engagement with local communities, coordination with infrastructure
 110 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 111
North Charlestown
Jeffries Point to Central Square
Orient Heights
   Wood Island
 New Charles River Dam
  Downtown Waterfront
Porzio Park
 South Boston Waterfront
  Dorchester Bay
POTENTIAL FLOOD PROTECTION LOCATIONS
Based on existing topography, rights-of-way, and urban and environmental conditions, Climate Ready Boston has identified key “breach points” where flood protection systems could potentially be sited. Important additional factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions, and zoning—as well as any potential external impacts as a result of the project—have not been studied in detail and should be required as part of detailed feasibility studies, along with appropriate public and stakeholder outreach and coordination.
For more details on these potential flood protection locations, including a discussion
of order-of-magnitude benefits that could be realized from flood protection systems, see the Focus Areas chapter and Appendix of
this report.
  
 POTENTIAL HARBOR-WIDE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
A harbor-wide intervention could potentially occur along one of multiple different alignments:
• Inner Harbor Barrier from Logan Airport to Castle Island.
• Harbor Island Barrier from Deer Island across Long Island to Moon Island in Quincy.
• Outer Harbor Barrier from Deer Island, across the Harbor Islands (most likely Lovell’s Island), to the Hull Peninsula
The outer alignments would reduce flood risk in a greater area but would also likely be longer, more expensive, and have greater environmental consequences. The inner alignments would offer flood risk reduction for smaller areas but may also have fewer implementation challenges (see “Boston Harbor and Harbor-Wide Flood Protection,” p.115).
adaptation, and considerations of how flood protection would impact or be impacted by neighborhood character and growth.
The location and design options of flood protection systems determine their positive and negative impacts and implementation feasibility. In connecting areas of high ground to one another, many flood protection systems must span more than one type of location or design. Location and design options for district-scale flood protection include the following:
◦ In-water. Within a water body, a flood protection project would likely be an operable gate. In-water defenses can restrict navigable channels. In addition, they are likely to require higher elevations to protect against flooding due to wave heights, which can block visual and physical access to water.
◦ Water’s edge. At the water’s edge, there are many types of potential flood protection designs. As with in-water barriers, defenses at the water’s edge are likely to require higher elevations to protect against flooding due to wave heights.
◦ Upland. There are many types of flood protection designs upland from the water as well. Compared to in-water or water’s edge defenses, upland flood protection systems provide a comparatively smaller area of risk reduction. However, they are not likely to be as tall as defenses in the water or at the water’s edge, since the ground elevation is higher, and wave energies dissipate over land. Still, upland flood protection can interfere with visual and physical connections within a neighborhood. In addition, they may cross roads, requiring deployable gates, or cross privately owned land.
See “Example Flood Protection Designs” (p.102) for a sample of various design options.
INITIATIVE 5-4. LAUNCH A HARBOR-WIDE FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM FEASIBILITY STUDY.
The City, in collaboration with regional partners, should study the feasibility and desirability of a harbor-wide flood protection system and compare it to the alternative of multiple district-scale defenses, using a consistent evaluation framework (see Initiative 5-2, p. 106). Partners may include the Metropolitan Area Planning Council (MAPC) and its Metro Boston Climate Preparedness Task Force. In addition, early and frequent engagement with the Massachusetts Office of Coastal Zone Management and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers would be critical, as well as ongoing engagement with the Boston Harbor Islands National and State Park. Studying such a significant intervention
in detail is a major undertaking in its own right, and such studies elsewhere have been multiyear efforts requiring significant public resources and structured coordination.
As part of comparing the feasibility and desirability of multiple harbor-wide and district- scale alternatives using a consistent evaluation framework (see Initiative 5-2, p.106), a study would need to consider a number of location and design options for a harbor-wide intervention, including the following:
 ◦
Alignment options. A harbor-wide intervention could potentially occur along
one of multiple different alignments. The outermost alignment would stretch from Deer Island and across the Harbor Islands (most likely Lovell’s Island) to the Hull Peninsula. An alignment closer to the shore would stretch from Deer Island across Long Island to Moon Island in Quincy. Finally, an Inner Harbor alignment would stretch from Logan Airport to Castle Island. As a very basic comparison, the outer alignments would reduce flood
risk in a greater area but would also likely
be longer, more expensive, and have greater
 112 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 113
 
  environmental consequences. The inner alignments would offer flood risk reduction for smaller areas, but may also have fewer implementation challenges.
◦ Sizes of gaps and gates. For each approach to a harbor-wide intervention—only decreasing tidal range, and doing so with an operable surge barrier—there are questions related
to the optimal size of harbor openings, with respect to both reducing flood risk and minimizing negative impacts. A feasibility study would need to explore how narrow the harbor mouth would need to be in order to sufficiently reduce the tidal range to reduce flood risk. For the surge barrier option, there
would be some narrowing of the harbor mouth by virtue of the in-water infrastructure necessary to support the barrier. A feasibility study would need to explore the size, number, and locations of gates necessary to provide flood risk reduction while minimizing the impacts on the environment and navigation. For both options, attention must be paid to how the tide levels and salinity of the harbor would change, along with the consequences for local and regional ecosystems.
◦ Project phasing. Based on best practices from other locations, it is critical that resilience solutions be adaptable and flexible. Any harbor-wide intervention would be a very
large investment, built to reduce flood risk for generations to come. However, as discussed
in the Climate Projection Consensus (see p.01) there is uncertainty regarding future sea levels after about 2050, both because of the complex nature of climatic systems and because they are heavily dependent on the success of global efforts to reduce emissions. To address this uncertainty, the City should explore how to minimize the probability of designing to too high or too low a standard. For example, it may be worthwhile to narrow the tidal range in a way that would accommodate the addition of
a surge barrier at a later point in time.
114 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Image courtesy of Bud Ris
 BOSTON HARBOR AND HARBOR-WIDE FLOOD PROTECTION
The challenges of implementing a harbor-wide
flood protection system, as well as the potential environmental impacts, are significant. However, Boston Harbor also has distinctive characteristics that may make it more amenable to a harbor-wide flood protection system than are other cities’ harbors:
• Harbor depth. The harbor is relatively shallow. Aside from the major shipping channels, which have been dredged to accommodate large vessels and are currently being deepened, much of the harbor is about 20 feet deep. The $310 million Boston Harbor Dredging Project will deepen the Outer Harbor 40-foot channel to 51 feet, the
Inner Harbor 40-foot channel to 47 feet, and the Reserved Channel to 47 feet. Feasibility studies of channel narrowing or barrier construction should consider the impact of channel deepening.
• Public land. Almost all of the land that would need to be incorporated into a harbor intervention— from Deer Island through the Harbor Islands—is publicly owned and therefore can more readily accommodate a public flood protection project.
There are also a number of factors that would make construction of a harbor-wide flood barrier challenging, including impacts on ecological communities
resulting from changing tidal conditions and salinity levels; the impacts on water quality because of decreased exchange of water between the harbor and the ocean; the potential for conflicts with commercial shipping, recreational boating, and water transportation; and the risk of inducing flooding in areas on the Atlantic Ocean side of a harbor-wide flood defense.
Source: “Boston to Begin Dredging in 2017.” The Journal of Commerce, November 2015.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 115

  Layer 4 RESILIENT
INFRASTRUCTURE
116 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Climate Resilience Initiatives 117

  Strategy 6: Coordinate investments to adapt infrastructure to future climate conditions
INITIATIVE 6-1. ESTABLISH AN INFRASTRUCTURE COORDINATION COMMITTEE
ICC Formation
The Mayor should work with the Governor of Massachusetts and other key stakeholders to establish a standing Infrastructure Coordination Committee (ICC), consisting of key private and public infrastructure owners and operators in
the Boston metro area. The ICC should serve as
the primary vehicle for coordination between
the City and these entities on how to set design standards and track investments in climate resilient infrastructure. The committee also can be used as a framework to support coordination on other issues, as required.
The continued reliability of the infrastructure systems that meet Boston’s transportation, water and sewer, energy, communication, and other needs is necessary for both Boston’s continued prosperity and its residents’ safety and health.
The ICC is needed because Boston does not have direct control over all of the infrastructure that serves its population and economy, relying partially on regional systems. Climate Ready Boston’s Vulnerability Assessment revealed that Boston’s infrastructure systems are vulnerable to near-
term and long-term climate impacts. Discussions conducted through Climate Ready Boston’s Infrastructure Advisory Group indicated that infrastructure owners and operators do not have full information on their systems’ vulnerability to changing climate conditions, especially in regard to upstream and downstream impacts. Both the City and infrastructure operators have a vested interest in understanding and addressing vulnerabilities
to create resilient infrastructure systems. The ICC should provide a forum to bring together the key actors who regulate, operate, and own infrastructure so they can align their efforts, in terms of both setting and implementing standards to meet future climate conditions.
The key members of the ICC should include representatives from all of the major infrastructure systems, including transportation, water and sewer, energy, telecommunications, and environmental
BOSTON-AREA ICC PRECEDENTS
The ICC should build on four important efforts that have
been undertaken in Boston and the metro region to date to convene key public and private infrastructure operators about issues directly or indirectly related to resilience. For Climate Ready Boston, in 2015, the City convened the Infrastructure Advisory Group to collect data about vulnerable assets
and infrastructure system interdependencies and discuss possible resilience initiatives. In 2016, the Boston Planning and Development Agency convened the Smart Utilities Planning Committee to do coordinated, proactive utility planning for the Dorchester Avenue corridor. In 2014, the Office of Emergency Management convened the Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan Steering Committee, comprised of representatives of key City
NON-BOSTON ICC PRECEDENTS
To date, there have been efforts to establish entities similar to the ICC in other cities, most notably in New York City. In 2008, Mayor Michael Bloomberg convened the New York City Climate Change Adaptation Task Force (CCATF), a group of public
and private infrastructure operators, to assess climate risks
to their assets and identify strategies to protect them. Mayor Bloomberg charged the CCATF with developing an inventory of at-risk infrastructure assets, supporting coordinated adaptation planning, and creating design guidelines for new infrastructure. The New York City Panel on Climate Change (NYCPCC), an independent body of climate scientists, advised the CCATF. In 2013, following Hurricane Sandy, Mayor Bloomberg convened the Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency (SIRR) to
departments and commissions with responsibility for hazard mitigation, to guide the Boston Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan Update. In 2011, as part of the process for preparing Massachusetts’s first Climate Change Adaptation Report,
a mandate of the 2008 Global Warming Solutions Act, the Massachusetts Executive Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs convened both the Climate Change Adaptation Advisory Committee and the State Agencies Steering Committee. Through these groups, Boston and the Commonwealth have started the process of building institutional knowledge and overcoming barriers to data sharing.
develop a comprehensive roadmap for resilience building in NYC, leveraging the work of the CCATF.
In addition, as part of Con Edison’s electric, gas, and steam rate cases filed in January 2013, the New York State Public Service Commission convened the Storm Hardening and Resiliency Collaborative to provide guidance on how the funds should be spent. The collaborative brought together academic experts to support Con Edison in adaptation planning.
Sources: “A Stronger More Resilient New York.” Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency, City of New York, June 11, 2013.
“Storm Hardening and Resiliency Collaborative Report.” Consolidated Edison Company of New York Inc. December 4, 2013.
 RESILIENCE RATE CASE
The utilities that serve the Boston metro region may seek funds for resilience capital projects as part of their rate cases to the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities (DPU) so that they can cover
the costs of required resilience investments. For example, Con Edison included a $1 billion request for funds to support resilience capital upgrades from 2013 to 2016 as part of its electric, gas, and steam rate cases filed in January 2013. Should the utilities pursue this approach in Boston, the City may want to consider whether to support such a request. The Greater Boston Panel on Climate Change could
be available to provide expert testimony about future climate conditions and the need for resilience investments to address utility system vulnerabilities.
DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARDS BY ICC WORKING GROUPS
   STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT WORK TO DATE
In developing system standards, the ICC should leverage significant work done by its members to date. For example, the Boston Water and Sewer Commission has developed recommendations for the 10-year, 24-hour design storm, annual rainfall totals, and elevation at which outfalls are required to be tide-gated. In addition, the Massachusetts Port Authority has developed recommendations for design flood elevations as part of a new flood- proofing design guide. For existing facilities, the design flood elevation is the maximum water elevation with a 0.2 percent annual probability
of exceedance in 2030 based on the Boston
Harbor Flood Risk Model (BH-FRM), plus three
feet of freeboard. For new facilities, the design flood elevation is defined by the maximum water elevation with a 0.2 percent annual probability
of exceedance in 2070 based on the BH-FRM,
plus three feet of freeboard. The Massachusetts Department of Transportation has put forward recommendations for elevations at which to deploy temporary and permanent protections for Central Artery and tunnel assets.
 118 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
WORKING GROUP
WATER AND SEWER
KEY MEMBERS
Boston Water and Sewer Commission, Massachusetts Water Resource Authority, Department of Conservation and Recreation, Public Improvement Commission
STANDARDS TO BE DEVELOPED
• 10-year, 24-hour design storm
• Annual rainfall totals
• Elevation at which public and private outfalls
are required to be tide-gated
• Elevation and level of protection requirements
for assets critical to maintaining service
• Performance design standards
   TRANSPORTATION
Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority, Massachusetts Department of Transportation, Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation, Boston Transportation Department, Boston Public Works Department
• Elevation and level of protection requirements
for assets critical to maintaining service (roads, bridges, tunnels, rail, subways, buses, water transit, and transportation support facilities)
• Performance design standards
   ENERGY
Eversource, National Grid, Veolia, Boston Environment Department, Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities
• Elevations and level of protection requirements for critical assets and facilities
• Performance design standards
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Verizon, Comcast, Department of Innovation and Technology
• Elevations and level of protection requirements for assets critical to maintaining service
• Level of access and continuity of service for broadband and Wi-Fi access
• Performance design standards
• RedundancyClimate Resilience Initiatives 119
   
assets, that are critical to the City of Boston’s operations. These individuals should include participants from City departments, state agencies, private utilities, and adjacent municipalities that interact with or affect Boston’s infrastructure systems. The ICC will be coordinated closely with the Metro Boston Climate Preparedness Task Force, which has been convened by the Metro Mayors Coalition.
ICC Duties
To strengthen Boston’s resilience, the ICC should be charged with four duties:
First, the ICC should use the updated climate projections to develop planning and design standards across member agencies for retrofitting or constructing all major infrastructure systems to a standard set of future climate conditions. The ICC should work with the City to define levels of acceptable risk. Members should be organized into working groups by major infrastructure system, with the groups to include transportation, water and sewer, energy, telecommunications, and environmental assets, in order to develop specific planning and design standards by system.
Second, ICC members should collaborate
to identify cascading vulnerabilities and opportunities for joint adaptation projects that could improve effectiveness or cost efficiencies
by addressing multiple systems’ vulnerabilities
at once. The ICC should provide a framework for members to detect and reduce vulnerabilities that fall within larger systems that affect their assets
but are out of their direct control. In addition,
the ICC should provide a forum for members to share information, consult with each other about adaptation projects they plan to individually undertake, and work together to identify efficiencies and important community co-benefits, including advancing equity.
Third, ICC members should develop adaptation plans, tied to capital improvement plans, in order 120 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
to upgrade their vulnerable assets over time
to meet the agreed-upon planning and design standards. ICC members can use the Climate Ready Boston Vulnerability Assessment data as the basis for their adaptation planning. However, they may need to conduct asset-specific vulnerability assessments. Members should be asked to develop adaptation plans within five years of the initial planning and design standards being released. These plans should consider adaptation both across their systems as well as within specific focus areas prioritized by the City for coordinated adaptation planning. Capital projects should be prioritized based on the following:
◦ Timing and level of assets’ exposure to climate change risks
◦ Consequences of assets’ full or partial failure, including frequency and severity of service disruption
◦ Cost and feasibility
◦ Opportunity to advance equity and protect socially vulnerable populations. The City should charge ICC members with paying particular attention to vulnerable populations who may be disproportionately impacted by full or partial infrastructure failure.
Finally, members should provide the City with regular reports on their progress in developing adaptation plans and bringing their assets up to planning and design standards. The Environment Department should annually summarize those reports to inform joint adaptation planning and identify gaps in adaptation across systems.
INITIATIVE 6-2. CONTINUE TO COLLECT IMPORTANT ASSET AND HAZARD DATA FOR PLANNING PURPOSES
To maximize the benefit of the data collected and produced as part of Climate Ready Boston, Climate Ready Boston should transfer non-confidential data on public and private infrastructure assets to the
Department of Information Technology (DoIT). The objective of this initiative is to establish a central place for the storage of key data about infrastructure systems to create an integrated dataset and allow for the identification of upstream and downstream vulnerabilities. For the Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Ready Boston requested information on public and private infrastructure assets from a broad range of city and state agencies and private infrastructure operators, and reconciled and verified the submitted data. DoIT should coordinate with
the Boston Regional Intelligence Center (BRIC) database to explore holding and storing data that is sensitive or proprietary.
INITIATIVE 6-3. PROVIDE GUIDANCE
ON PRIORITY EVACUATION AND SERVICE ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE ICC
To guide adaptation planning by ICC members, the Office of Emergency Management (OEM), Boston Transportation Department (BTD), and Department of Public Works (PWD) should work with the utilities to identify roads to prioritize
for adaptation planning. These roads should include first those that are part of Boston’s evacuation network and second those that are required to restore or maintain essential services, for example, by delivering personnel or backup power (mobile generators or fuel) to critical facilities. OEM should share the list with the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (Mass DOT) and Department of Conservation and Recreation (DCR). The City should support Mass DOT in continuing its efforts to develop an emergency response plan for tunnel protection or closure in the event of a major storm, in line with the recommendations from the 2015 FHWA/Mass DOT Central Artery and tunnels vulnerability assessment.
  MBTA VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT
To support the ICC, the City should request that the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) expand its asset-level vulnerability assessment from the Blue Line, currently in progress, to its entire public transit system. Prior to the current Blue Line study, vulnerability assessment of the MBTA’s assets and services has been limited to assets
within the Central Artery corridor (e.g., South Station, Silver Line, Aquarium Station, and North Station) included in MassDOT’s Federal Highway Administration-funded study. The MBTA’s system-wide vulnerability assessment should include detailed analyses of physical infrastructure assets and supporting systems, and consider not only the relative importance of specific assets, but also their upstream
and downstream interdependencies, with particular attention to the energy supplies
on which MBTA’s systems rely and potential impacts on vulnerable populations. The MBTA should consider the vulnerabilities of both
the regional energy infrastructure on which
it depends for maintaining service and its internal backup power supply, which ensures continued operation even when the power grid is unavailable.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 121
  
Strategy 7: Develop district- scale energy solutions to increase decentralization and redundancy
INITIATIVE 7-1. CONDUCT FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
The Boston Planning and Development Agency and Environment Department should work
with the relevant members of the ICC and other stakeholders to use the findings from the BPDA’s Boston Community Energy Study (2016) to develop action plans to pursue community energy solutions in areas with significant concentrations of critical facilities and socially vulnerable populations. Community energy solutions are local energy generation, energy storage technologies, district energy, and microgrids. The Community Energy Study identified 42 locations across Boston with
high potential for community-based energy solutions, based on preliminary engineering and cost-benefit analyses. However, there is a need
for further feasibility studies that evaluate other important factors, such as the state and capacity of existing infrastructure at potential sites, building retrofit costs, and street excavation costs. For example, parts of the Downtown, Charles River, and South Boston focus areas are served by an electrical grid that is not designed to export locally generated energy.
The BPDA and the Environment Department should prioritize further feasibility studies for potential energy justice and emergency microgrid sites, as identified by the Community Energy Study. Energy justice microgrid sites have the potential to serve clusters of affordable housing and critical facilities. Emergency microgrid sites have the potential to serve clusters of critical facilities.
Strategy 8: Expand the use of green infrastructure and other natural systems to manage stormwater, mitigate heat, and provide additional benefits.
With climate change, Boston faces more intense precipitation that will increase total stormwater volume and decrease water quality, rising sea levels that will inhibit stormwater outfalls from draining, and increasing temperatures. Under these conditions, large-scale expansion of green infrastructure in Boston has the potential to
both increase the city’s resilience and provide many co-benefits. Green infrastructure helps
slow the pace of stormwater runoff, support on-
site infiltration, and reduce pollutants entering waterways. It offers a decentralized approach to stormwater management that supports redundancy and adaptability because it can be expanded
over time. It also may be less costly than gray infrastructure. Furthermore, green infrastructure can help mitigate the urban heat island effect by creating shade, reducing heat-absorbing materials, and emitting water vapor that cools the air. It
also can help create an attractive environment, clean the air by filtering airborne pollutants, and reduce building energy costs through shading and recyclable water.4
4 Source: “A Triple Bottom Line Assessment of Traditional and Green Infrastructure Options for Controlling CSO Events in Philadelphia’s Watersheds.” Stratus Consulting. August 24, 2009.
   PROPOSED COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
  122 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
RAYMOND L. FLYNN MARINE PARK MICROGRID
The BPDA is working with Eversource to pursue a feasibility study for a pilot microgrid project at the Raymond L. Flynn Marine Park in South Boston.
 BOSTON’S USE OF GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
In recent years, Boston has started to expand its
use of green infrastructure, which encompasses a range of interventions, including porous pavement; bioswales; rain gardens; tree planters; green streets, alleys, and parking lots; green roofs; and constructed wetlands. Relative to gray infrastructure traditionally used to manage stormwater, green infrastructure has the potential to provide numerous environmental, economic, and social co-benefits.
In 2012, BWSC reached an agreement (consent decree) with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Conservation Law Foundation to address pollution caused by stormwater runoff as required
by the Clean Water Act, after these organizations asserted that BWSC was not moving quickly enough
to do so. Under the agreement, BWSC committed to
a seven-year plan to find and remove illegal sewage connections and expand its use of stormwater management best practices, including green infrastructure. BWSC also agreed to prepare a report identifying the stormwater best management practices most suitable for use in Boston, and to construct three demonstration green infrastructure projects at Central Square in East Boston, Audubon Circle, and City
Hall Plaza. BWSC has provided the capital funding
for these projects but partnered with BTD and PWD, which control the sites and are doing transportation upgrades, to construct the green infrastructure. BWSC also has agreed to fund and perform three years of required maintenance for these projects but does not have an ongoing maintenance plan beyond that.
In addition to BWSC, local nonprofits, including the Charles River Watershed Association (CRWA), have supported green infrastructure in Boston. CRWA
led the development of two green infrastructure demonstration projects at Everett Street in Allston and Peabody Square in Dorchester, and also created a set of Green Street Guidelines for Allston-Brighton that identify potential green infrastructure interventions on three pilot streets.
Finally, the City has been actively supporting green infrastructure. The Boston Transportation Department incorporated green street strategies into Boston’s Complete Streets Design Guidelines. In addition, the Boston Parks and Recreation Department has installed rain gardens in multiple city parks, and is evaluating opportunities for additional locations with current design projects.
Source: Marks, Alex. “Stormwater Management in Boston: To What Extent Are Demonstration Projects Likely to Enable Citywide Use of Green Infrastructure” MIT Thesis. 2014.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 123

 INITIATIVE 8-1. DEVELOP A GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE LOCATION PLAN FOR PUBLIC LAND AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
The City should work with the Boston Water
and Sewer Commission to develop a green infrastructure location plan for public land and rights-of-way in Boston. The green infrastructure location plan should identify high-priority sites for green infrastructure development, focusing on existing public land but also considering potential future public land that could be acquired to support multifunctional green space. This green space would provide stormwater management
and other benefits. The purpose of the green infrastructure location plan is to increase the volume of water managed on-site on public land, as well as to identify potential opportunities to manage off-site stormwater.
The Energy, Environment, and Open Space Cabinet, which includes the Environment Department and Parks Department, should
lead this effort, with the participation of other relevant City agencies, such as the Transportation Department, Public Works Department, and Boston Public Schools. The Boston Water and Sewer Commission is currently conducting a
SITING GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
PRIORITIZATION CRITERIA
FEASIBLE PROJECT TYPES
  GOAL
PRIORITY LOCATIONS FOR GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
  IMPROVE WATER QUALITY TO MEET FEDERAL STANDARDS
MITIGATE CURRENT AND FUTURE CLIMATE CHANGE HAZARDS (EXTREME HEAT)
MITIGATE CURRENT AND FUTURE CLIMATE CHANGE HAZARDS (STORMWATER FLOODING)
PROVIDE EQUITABLE ACCESS TO GREEN SPACE THROUGHOUT BOSTON
IMPROVE NEIGHBORHOOD LIVABILITY AND HEALTH AND SERVE SOCIALLY VULNERABLE POPULATIONS
LEVERAGE PLANNED CAPITAL UPGRADES SO THAT GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE CAN BE INCORPORATED INTO THESE PROJECTS
Areas with high pollutant loads
Areas that are daytime or nighttime land surface temperature hot spots (heat islands)
• Areas that are subject to current or near-term stormwater flooding (lie at low elevations and have limited hydraulic capacity)
• Upstream areas where green infrastructure construction could help reduce downstream stormwater flooding
• Areas with large amounts of impervious surface
Neighborhoods with lower-than-average access to green space, especially those with high concentrations of socially vulnerable populations
• Areas with higher-than-average air pollution levels • Areas with lower-than-average tree canopy
Areas targeted for future capital projects, such as parks or roads upgrades
comprehensive analysis of its drainage system
to identify high-priority locations for green infrastructure in Boston based on this type of infrastructure’s capacity to reduce total pollutant loads. The Energy, Environment, and Open
Space Cabinet should supplement this analysis
by developing a set of other green infrastructure location prioritization criteria that serve other goals. Potential criteria are shown on the opposite page.
To refine this list of criteria, the Energy, Environment, and Open Space Cabinet should draw on four sources:
◦ The Trust for Public Land’s work on green infrastructure prioritization throughout Boston developed as part of its Climate Smart Cities initiative; and
◦ The Boston Water and Sewer studies to identify high-potential locations for green infrastructure based on pollutant loading and to define the most feasible types of green infrastructure for these locations.
The City and BWSC then should collaborate to create a green infrastructure location plan that shows sites that meet multiple criteria so that they can be prioritized for green infrastructure construction.
        ◦
◦
The findings from Climate Ready Boston;
The green infrastructure location analysis currently being done by the Parks and Recreation Department for the assets that it owns;
    124 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 125

INITIATIVE 8-2. DEVELOP A SUSTAINABLE OPERATING MODEL FOR GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE ON PUBLIC LAND AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
The City should work with the Boston Water
and Sewer Commission to develop a sustainable operating model for green infrastructure on public land, including trees. Currently, the lack of a sustainable funding and operating model for green infrastructure on public land is a major barrier
that has limited its large-scale deployment. Green infrastructure assets require different maintenance procedures than gray infrastructure assets and must be properly maintained to preserve their functionality. Green infrastructure maintenance
should be tied to efforts to support workforce development and inclusive hiring (see Strategy 3, p.95).
The Energy, Environment, and Open Space Cabinet should lead this effort, with the participation of other relevant City agencies, such as the Budget Department. The Energy, Environment, and Open Space Cabinet should be charged with four tasks. First, it should establish a clear division of responsibilities that defines which entities are responsible for constructing, maintaining, and evaluating the performance of different types of green infrastructure. Second,
it should evaluate the total capital and operating
and maintenance costs associated with large-scale
deployment of green infrastructure in Boston and
recommend a “triple bottom line” approach to
evaluating costs and benefits. An excellent model is the
framework developed by Philadelphia that considers
long-term financial, social, and environmental benefits
5
againstcosts. Third,theEnergy,Environment,and
Open Space Cabinet should recommend a toolkit of green infrastructure financing strategies to support both capital and operating and maintenance costs, recognizing that Boston may require new sources
of funds to expand green infrastructure use. Fourth,
it should identify opportunities to create streamlined, standardized green infrastructure maintenance processes that create cost efficiencies. The Energy, Environment, and Open Space Cabinet should
review best practices from other cities that are national leaders in the large-scale deployment of green infrastructure, such as New York City, Philadelphia,
INITIATIVE 8-3. EVALUATE INCENTIVES AND OTHER TOOLS TO SUPPORT GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
The City and Boston Water and Sewer Commission should evaluate a set of incentives and other tools to reduce impervious surfaces, increase on-site stormwater retention and management, and create green infrastructure
on public and private property. For example,
the City can explore the creation of a green infrastructure revolving fund and a system that provides owners with savings on their water bills in exchange for green infrastructure creation
and maintenance. To fund incentives and other tools, the City and the Boston Water and Sewer Commission should consider a stormwater
fee, which has been implemented effectively
in other municipalities. The Boston Water and Sewer Commission is currently evaluating the feasibility of such a program. If implemented, the stormwater fee would charge property owners based on the amount of impervious surface on their property. BWSC’s feasibility study should include an evaluation of the fee’s economic impact on different types of property owners, particularly low-income owner-occupants and affordable housing providers.
INITIATIVE 8-4. DEVELOP
DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY TO SUPPORT CO-BENEFITS
The City should request that the Boston Sewer and Water Commission develop design guidelines and set maintenance protocols for green infrastructure on private property to encourage installations that deliver significant co-benefits, such as increased access to green space. In addition to their efforts to support green infrastructure on public property through the green infrastructure location plan (see Initiative 8-1, p.124), the City and BWSC also should prioritize the development of green infrastructure on private property in order to introduce it into neighborhoods where there may be limited public sites. Stormwater flooding in Boston tends to primarily impact residential buildings, making on-site solutions attractive.
BWSC is well positioned to develop design these guidelines following the completion of its studies
to identify feasible locations and types of green infrastructure. The current trend in Boston has been for property owners to install dry wells, which are expensive but need to be properly maintained to function effectively. BWSC does not have retrofitting requirements for sites that were built prior to its requirements.
The BPDA should evaluate the opportunity to
reinforce these design guidelines through changes to
the Boston Zoning Ordinance. This approach has been
used successfully by the City of Portland. In Portland,
the Stormwater Management Manual outlines design
guidelines, which are authorized by Portland City
Code Chapter 17.38, passed in 2008 and therefore
7
enforceable. In conjunction with development of the
design guidelines, the BRA and BWSC should assess the need to provide incentives to achieve specific types of green infrastructure on private property.
7 Source: Chai, Shutsu K. “Managing Stormwater in Watertown: Overcoming Obstacles to Change.” MIT Thesis. 2009.
 PHILADELPHIA’S “GREEN CITY, CLEAN WATERS” GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
In its 2009 Combined Sewer Overflow Long-
Term Control Plan, “Green City, Clean Waters,” Philadelphia committed to invest $1.6 billion
over 20 years to create a citywide network of green stormwater infrastructure, as opposed to a single, multi-billion dollar, 35-foot-diameter tunnel under the Delaware River. Philadelphia’s green infrastructure best practices include the following:
• Establishing a large-scale program, focused on converting one-third of Philadelphia’s existing impervious surface (about 4,000 acres) to green infrastructure
• Using a “triple bottom line” approach to evaluate the benefits of green infrastructure compared to gray infrastructure
• Setting up both regulatory requirements
and financial incentives (stormwater credits for constructing and maintaining green infrastructure) to promote private provision of green infrastructure
• Developing a green infrastructure audit program to help customers with high stormwater fees to reduce their fees through green infrastructure implementation
Source: “Green City, Clean Waters: The City of Philadelphia’s Program for Combined Sewer Overflow Control.”
Amended by the Philadelphia Water Department, June 1, 2011.
 STORMWATER REGULATION IN BOSTON
BWSC issues stormwater permits for new private development in Boston, and has the authority to require on-site stormwater retention and “other stormwater management measures” (Source: Section 14, Article IV, “Regulations Governing the Use of Sanitary and Combined Sewers and Storm Drains of the Boston Water and Sewer Commission”). In general, BWSC requires property owners to infiltrate a volume
of rainfall on-site equal to no less than one inch across the surface. The Groundwater Conservation Trust oversees stormwater management in the designated Groundwater Conservation Overlay District (GCOD) under Article 32 of the Boston Zoning Code. The GCOD requires projects to infiltrate a volume of rainfall on-site such that the project results in no negative impact
on groundwater levels. The Boston Planning and Development Agency also is able to institute site plan requirements as part of the Article 80 process.
126 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 127
Washington, DC, Seattle, and Portland.
6
5 Source: “A Triple Bottom Line Assessment of Traditional and Green Infrastructure Options for Controlling CSO Events in Philadelphia’s Watersheds.” Stratus Consulting, August 24, 2009.
6 Source: “Green City Clean Waters: The City of Philadelphia’s Program for Combined Sewer Overflow Control.” Amended by the Philadelphia Water Department, June 1, 2011.

INITIATIVE 8-5. DEVELOP AN ACTION PLAN TO EXPAND BOSTON’S URBAN TREE CANOPY
Currently, the Parks and Recreation Department is planning to conduct an inventory of Boston’s existing tree canopy to evaluate the current
state of Boston’s urban forest. Using the findings from this inventory, the Parks and Recreation Department should set criteria to prioritize where the City plants street trees. Expansion of Boston’s tree canopy should support the City’s green infrastructure efforts. Trees can help manage stormwater, mitigate heat in multiple ways, and reduce air pollution.
The City should explore strategies to overcome physical barriers to the establishment of
large trees in Boston. Large trees contribute significantly to Boston’s canopy and are less likely to die than smaller trees, but they require space and a sufficient volume of soil for roots to thrive. The City must balance many priorities when planning its sidewalks, such as safely accommodating pedestrians and providing space for needed furniture, but street trees should be an important part of this equation. In its new Complete Streets Guidelines, the City has set standards for sidewalk construction that establish preferred and minimum widths for
the greenscape and furnishing zone, ranging from 6 to 1.5 feet. The City should collaborate with private partners to implement the preferred standards in the development of new sidewalks or retrofitting of existing sidewalks, while
still meeting American with Disability Act requirements for a minimum pedestrian zone of 4 feet, to support the establishment of large trees.
In addition, as part of its climate readiness education campaign, the City should conduct outreach to private property owners about the importance of designing and constructing around existing trees, avoiding tree removals, and protecting large trees on private property.
The City should establish a Heat Overlay District in neighborhoods with the highest need for trees to help coordinate the actions of public and private actors. The District could perform the following functions:
◦ Set larger tree pit-size minimum requirements and increase the use of structural soil and permeable pavements where pit size is constrained. The City’s Complete Streets Guidelines have set the minimum width of the greenscape and furnishing zone necessary to support street tree installation as 2.6 to 6 feet.
◦ Require utilities and PWD to set protection of existing trees as a primary goal in projects, so that existing trees do not always lose out to space for bike lanes, parking, or utilities.
◦ Establish a review process for removal of trees over a certain size on private properties.
◦ Establish minimum lot shade coverage requirements for private properties.
INITIATIVE 8-6. PREPARE OUTDOOR FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
As an ICC member, the Parks and Recreation Department should develop an adaptation plan, tied to a capital investment plan, to prepare its outdoor facilities for climate change. The Parks
and Recreation Department will identify facilities where resilience improvements are needed to address near-term flooding impacts, and evaluate whether the improvements are feasible to incorporate into existing planned capital upgrades or will require a new work stream. To address extreme heat, the Parks and Recreation Department will evaluate opportunities to increase shade trees and structures, reduce heat-absorbing surfaces, and add “spray” water features and water fountains as part of all capital upgrades.
INITIATIVE 8-7. CONDUCT A COMPREHENSIVE WETLANDS INVENTORY AND DEVELOP A WETLANDS PROTECTION ACTION PLAN
The Conservation Commission should conduct
a comprehensive wetlands inventory to define priority sites for wetlands restoration and inland buffer areas that must be protected to enable habitats to migrate inland as sea levels rise. The wetlands inventory should consist of mapping
all existing wetlands, analyzing the functions (ecosystem services) performed by them, and identifying sites that are of high resource value and are at high risk due to development or climate impacts.
Following the completion of this inventory, the Conservation Commission should develop an action plan for protecting wetlands to preserve environmental quality and help in protecting against climate impacts. The action plan should define the pathways that the City can use to protect wetlands, including regulation (e.g., a Local Wetlands Ordinance) and acquisition of key sites. This could include a Local Wetlands Ordinance (LWO) that enables the Conservation Commission to protect additional wetlands types, protect already-covered types to a greater degree, and take future climate impacts into account during project review. The LWO could give the Conservation Commission jurisdiction over a buffer area adjacent to lands subject to current coastal storm flowage, based on likely sea level rise, and establish performance standards for all protected areas.
128 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 WETLANDS REGULATION IN MASSACHUSETTS
Depending on their location and attributes, wetlands have the opportunity to mitigate all three types of climate risks that Boston is facing: extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding. Coastal wetlands can help reduce the speed and force of waves coming onshore during storm surge events and can prevent water from coming inland if the wetlands have elevated
edges. Inland wetlands can help convey and filter stormwater runoff and reduce flow into stormwater treatment systems. Due to their vegetation, wetlands can mitigate urban heat. Wetlands also absorb large quantities of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, accumulated over hundreds and thousands of years, and store it as carbon sinks, thereby helping
to mitigate global warming. Tidal wetlands are at risk from sea level rise and need to have the ability to migrate inland, or they may be lost, even with restoration efforts. Wetlands loss not only prevents future carbon capture but also releases stored carbon, increasing greenhouse gas levels in the atmosphere.
Currently, the Boston Conservation Commission regulates activities in coastal and inland wetland resource areas through the Commonwealth’s 1972 Wetlands Protection Act (WPA) and accompanying regulations. The WPA recognizes eight important public values or functions provided by wetlands
and protects them in 12 types of Coastal Resource Areas and 5 types of Inland Resource Areas. Coastal Resource Areas include Lands Subject to Coastal Storm Flowage (LSCSF), which perform important functions related to protecting from storm damage and assisting with flood control. Individuals performing any work that removes, fills, dredges, or alters any resource area must obtain a permit, or Order of Conditions, from the Conservation Commission that defines requirements to be met before, during, and after the work.
While the state WPA provides protection to many types of wetlands, it has some limitations. First, the state WPA does not protect all types of wetlands. Second, while it defines specific performance standards for Inland Resource Areas, it does not establish specific performance standards for Coastal Resource Areas or buffer areas. Coastal Resource Areas have general standards or none
at all. Work done within buffer zones can have significant impacts on Coastal Resource Areas. Third, it does not allow the Conservation Commission to take into account projected future or cumulative effects of climate change, including sea level rise, when reviewing project impacts. However, the Commonwealth allows municipalities to enact
local wetlands ordinances that enable them to protect more wetlands types; protect existing
types to a greater extent, including by establishing performance standards; and take into consideration future conditions. The City should support state efforts to develop performance standards for Coastal Resource Areas and evaluate the role of a local wetlands ordinance.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 129

    Layer 5 ADAPTED
BUILDINGS
130 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Climate Resilience Initiatives 131

 Strategy 9. Update zoning and building regulations to support climate readiness
These initiatives build on the Boston Planning and Development Agency’s Resiliency Policy, which has required all large project proposals to analyze and describe their climate preparedness through a Climate Preparedness Checklist since 2013. Boston should now take the next step of incorporating climate readiness across its building regulations.
Current zoning and building codes do not yet institutionalize climate readiness:
◦ Current regulations do not consider future climate conditions. Building standards for flooding refer to FEMA’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), which are based on historical information. While a building constructed to these standards may be climate ready today, as sea levels rise, it will face continuously increasing risk.
◦ Current regulations discourage adaptation.
In order to become more climate ready, many buildings would need to elevate their first floors and mechanical systems. However, regulatory limits on height and bulk often discourage such elevations.
◦ Current regulations foster a site-scale approach to climate readiness. While individual new and renovated buildings have some requirements to build to certain climate- ready standards, there are no regulatory mechanisms to build in a way that would provide broader district-scale flood risk reduction and address the impact of individual retrofits and adaptation projects on overall flood risk and urban design. Regulations also do not protect the beneficial functions of storm damage prevention and flood control provided by the coastal floodplain.
The initiatives under this strategy follow three basic principles:
◦ The City should prioritize areas in which it has independent authority. While the City controls its own zoning code and can directly amend it,
it does not control the building code and will therefore need to work with the Commonwealth (see Background: Regulatory Context for Buildings, p.133).
◦ The City is the ultimate long-term investor
in all local properties. While individual and institutional property owners have a limited time horizon for owning certain properties
and therefore may not want to invest in long- term solutions or interventions where benefits accrue to future owners, the City has a moral and financial interest in making sure that buildings remain safe and maintain their value for generations. This is especially true in Boston, where approximately two-thirds of City revenues come from the property tax.8 To continue to offer quality services, the City must protect its tax base in both the short and the long term.
◦ Flexibility and adaptability are essential; there is more than one way to prepare for climate change. Many buildings built today will still be standing at the end of the century. At that time, as described in the Climate Projection Consensus (see p.01), sea levels are likely to be three to
seven feet higher. Given this range, it is possible to build in ways that will allow adaptation
over time. For example, one approach for new buildings would be to have high ground-floor ceilings so that the ground floor can be raised as sea levels rise over time, without creating undesirably low floor-to-ceiling heights.
8 Source: “Revenue Estimates and Analysis for Fiscal Year 2017.” Boston Office of Budget Management. 2016.
132 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 BACKGROUND: REGULATORY CONTEXT FOR BUILDINGS9
BUILDING CODE
In Massachusetts, the building code is established at
the state level by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards (BBRS) and administered at the local level by the City of Boston’s Inspectional Services Department (ISD). The City does not have authority to establish building code requirements that are stricter than the state building code without approval from the Commonwealth
(see Initiative 9-5, p.138).
In the Massachusetts Building Code, flood-resistant construction standards apply to all new or substantially renovated structures within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), as defined by the currently effective FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs).
The SFHA is the area exposed to a 1 percent annual chance flood, and most areas within the SFHA are assigned a base flood elevation (BFE), the elevation to which floodwater is expected to rise during a 1 percent annual chance flood. FIRMs outline three subareas within the SFHA:
• Zone V, subject to wave action with wave heights of 3 feet or more;
• Coastal Zone A, subject to wave action with wave heights of 1.5 to 3 feet; and
• Non-Coastal Zone A, subject to waves less than 1.5 feet in height.
The 8th Edition of the Building Code, which is currently in effect, requires the following for new or substantially renovated structures:
• In Zone V, the lowest horizontal structural member is required to be elevated at least two feet above the BFE
• In Coastal and Non-Coastal Zone A, lowest floors are required to be elevated at least to the BFE.
In early 2016, the BBRS approved a draft of the 9th Edition of the Building Code, which requires public review and final approval before it takes effect. The draft update includes the following new requirements for new or substantially renovated structures:
• In Coastal Zone A, the requirements for Zone V apply; and
• In Non-Coastal Zone A, the lower floor is required to be elevated, and the building equipment is required to be elevated or flood-proofed to at least one foot above
the BFE. Facilities essential for emergency response and recovery, or that contain hazardous materials, require elevation to two feet above the BFE or the 500-year flood elevation, whichever is higher.
ZONING CODE
The Boston Zoning Code is shaped by the Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA), adopted by the Boston Zoning Commission (BZC), and enforced by the Inspectional Services Department (ISD). The following articles of the Zoning Code are most relevant for climate readiness:
Article 25 is Boston’s flood-resistant construction zoning requirement. The City adopted Article 25 in order to comply with the National Flood Insurance Program, which requires municipalities to adopt flood-resistant construction standards before any property owners in the municipality can buy federally backed flood insurance. Article 25 does not contain any additional requirements beyond those included in the Massachusetts Building Code.
Article 80 sets forth guidelines for four types of BPDA development review: small projects (adding more than 20,000 square feet), large projects (adding more than 50,000 square feet), planned development areas (new overlay zoning districts for project areas larger than 1 acre), and institutional master plans (projects relating to academic and medical campuses). The review process can include an assessment of a project’s impacts on transportation, the public realm, the environment, and historic resources.
Article 37 is Boston’s green building zoning requirement,
administered by the Interagency Green Building Committee (IGBC). It requires all projects 50,000 square feet or larger to be certifiable under the U.S. Green Building Council’s LEED process. Since 2013, the BPDA has also required all large projects to complete a Climate Preparedness and Resiliency Checklist, which is also reviewed by the IGBC. In the checklist, applicants document the climate-preparedness measures incorporated into the project’s design.
Article 32 created Boston’s Groundwater Conservation Overlay District. It is monitored by the Boston Groundwater Trust. The purpose of the article is to ensure projects do not reduce groundwater levels in specific areas to prevent wooden
pilings under buildings from rotting. Developers are required to conduct a study of their project’s effect on groundwater and install recharge systems for excavation, construction, and rehabilitation of any area greater than 50 square feet.
WETLANDS PROTECTION ACT
The Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch.
131, § 40) and Regulations (310 CMR 10.00) are designed to ensure that the public’s interests in wetland resource areas
are preserved. In Boston, the regulations are administered
by the Conservation Commission. The jurisdiction of these regulations includes coastal beaches and dunes, intertidal flats, salt marshes, eelgrass, ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, and flood zones (defined as Special Flood Hazard Areas on the currently effective FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps) as well as 100-foot buffer zones around wetlands.
9 Source: “Incorporating Improved Coastal Flood Resiliency Measures into Boston’s Waterfront Regulations.” Boston Harbor Now Climate Resilience Committee. 2016.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 133

  SUMMARY OF INITIATIVES TO UPDATE ZONING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
#
INITIATIVE
RELEVANT REGULATION OR PROCESS
RECOMMENDED CHANGES
9-1
Establish a planning flood elevation to support zoning regulations in the future floodplain
 Boston Zoning Code
 Establish a Planning Flood Elevation for all buildings within the future 1 percent annual chance flood zone.
 9-2
Revise the zoning code to support climate-ready mechanical systems
Boston Zoning Code
Using the Planning Flood Elevation (Initiative 9-1), amend provisions of the Zoning Code (allowable height, bulk, and use) to ensure they promote and do not discourage climate-ready new construction and retrofits.
9-3
 Promote climate readiness for projects in the development pipeline
 Development Approval Process
 Offer developers with already-approved project an opportunity to adopt climate ready new construction standards (Initiative 9-2) based on the Planning Flood Elevation (Initiative 9-1) without needing to undergo a completely new City review process.
5-1
 Establish Flood Protection Overlay Districts and require potential integration with flood protection systems (see Protected Shores layer, p.98)
 Boston Zoning Code
 Establish a new overlay district in potential flood protection locations and require that development proposals do not prevent the future creation of flood protection infrastructure.
9-4
 Pursue state building code amendments to promote climate readiness
 Massachusetts Building Code
 Advocate to the state to adopt a
new minimum elevation for building mechanical systems based on the future 1 percent flood elevation at the end of a system’s design life.
9-5
 Incorporate future climate conditions into area plans
  Strategic Planning Areas, Planned Development Areas, Municipal Harbor Plans, and Institutional Master Plans
  Incorporate future climate considerations
into major neighborhood planning efforts.
    134 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
INITIATIVE 9-1. ESTABLISH A PLANNING FLOOD ELEVATION FOR ZONING REGULATIONS IN THE FUTURE FLOODPLAIN
The Boston Planning and Development
Agency (BPDA) should petition the Boston Zoning Commission to revise the zoning code
to incorporate the extents and depths of future flooding, as documented in appropriate future flood maps (see Initiative 1-2, p.84). This would be a first step toward correcting a flaw in Boston’s current floodplain regulations, which is that they rely on FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps that are based primarily on historical flood data and therefore do not include risk due to a changing climate.
In order to incorporate the extents and depths of future flooding, the BPDA should establish a planning flood elevation (PFE) for each project through the following steps:
◦ Institute standard planning time periods for new buildings, which may vary based on construction type. In the existing Climate Change Preparedness and Resiliency Checklist, the BPDA generally requires that large buildings in Boston consider climate change for at least the next 60 years.
◦ Use future flood projections (see Initiative 1-2, p.84) to determine whether each project is expected to be within the future 1 percent annual chance floodplain during the applicable planning time period.
◦ For each project within this future floodplain, determine the 1 percent annual chance flood elevation at the end of the planning time period. This is the planning flood elevation (PFE).
As noted under Background: Regulatory Context for Buildings (see p.133), Boston does not have
the authority to mandate minimum elevations
for buildings. However, Boston can incorporate the PFE into zoning regulations to both remove obstacles for existing buildings that want to voluntarily adapt, and require new buildings to be built to standards that would encourage future adaptation (see Initiative 9-2).
INITIATIVE 9-2. REVISE THE ZONING CODE TO SUPPORT CLIMATE-READY BUILDINGS
The Boston Planning & Development Agency (BPDA) should petition the Boston Zoning Commission to revise the zoning code to ensure regulations on the use, height, and bulk of buildings promote and do not discourage climate- ready new construction and retrofits. Under current regulations, property owners may avoid elevating their properties or mechanical systems
or taking other climate-readiness measures because they would be violating the zoning code or sacrificing buildable area.
The BPDA should also ensure that the zoning revisions encourage a quality streetscape and pedestrian activity even as buildings are elevated and flood-proofed. The elevation or flood-proofing of a building’s first floor could create a blank wall, leading to an uninviting streetscape, but this effect can be counteracted through design solutions such as planters, raised yards, front steps, or latticed walls.
The following are potential revisions to the Boston Zoning Code that could support climate- ready buildings and desirable urban design. Each requires further analysis to evaluate financial and design implications.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 135

  POTENTIAL ZONING REVISIONS
APPLICABLE FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS?
APPLICABLE FOR NEW BUILDINGS?
Measuring the maximum height of a building within a future floodplain from the building’s PFE, rather than from grade. This would allow owners to build or retrofit to climate-ready standards without sacrificing buildable area.
 
 
 Allowing first floors that are below the PFE to be converted to a use other than for human occupancy, wet flood-proofed, and removed from the total floor area calculation. This could not only reduce the occupants’ flood risk and owners’ insurance costs, but it could also allow the addition of new stories to buildings with the necessary structural capacity. The revenues from the addition of new stories could help finance the building retrofits.

 Allowing subgrade basements in the future flood zone to be filled in and removed from the total floor area calculation.
  
   Allowing mechanical systems, cables, and other wiring equipment to be elevated above the PFE and removed from total floor area calculation, or allowing mechanical systems to be moved outdoors, if such a move is required to achieve the elevation of systems without sacrificing buildable floor area. The movement of mechanical systems outdoors must not interfere with egress paths.

 Explicitly permitting temporary flood control devices in setbacks and public access areas in ways that reduce the potential for adverse impacts to adjacent properties.
  
  
 Requiring that the minimum ceiling height for ground floors be measured from the PFE. This would result in additional ground-floor floor-to-ceiling height so that, as sea levels and flood elevations rise, buildings can adapt by raising the first floors while still maintaining desirable floor-to-ceiling heights.
  
 Requiring that buildings raised significantly above grade feature ground- level design elements that activate the street. This would prevent the negative impact on pedestrian experience that can occur when buildings are elevated and feature only blank exterior walls below the first floor. Elevated commercial spaces can also retain their ground-floor storefront and provide access (stairs and ramps) to the raised first floor as part of an indoor vestibule.


 Increasing the total roof area that solar panels can cover without counting as an additional floor.
  
  
 Requiring or incentivizing design elements, such as planted green roofs or high-reflectance cool roofs, which limit stormwater runoff or mitigate the urban heat island effect.
 
 
   136 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
INITIATIVE 9-3. PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS FOR PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
Upon amending the zoning code to support climate readiness (see Initiative 9-2, p.135), the BPDA should immediately notify all developers with projects in the development pipeline in
the future floodplain that they may alter their plans in a manner consistent with the zoning amendments (e.g., raising their first-floor ceilings without violating building height limits) without needing to go through the entire BPDA permitting process again. The BPDA should notify the owner/ developer, architect, engineer, and contractor of record for each project. The BPDA would assess the legal bounds of instituting this expedited review process. Other local, state, or federal approvals may still be necessary.
There are currently hundreds of projects in Boston that have been approved for construction but not yet built. Many of these projects are in areas that are either currently in the floodplain or will be during the life of the building, and the buildings have not been planned to incorporate future flood risk. Many developers are not aware of the future risk, and even if they are, they might not want
to elevate their buildings and sacrifice buildable area. This proposed approach would encourage developers to make relatively small additional investments in climate readiness without sacrificing buildable area or delaying project timelines.
RELATED INITIATIVE:
INITIATIVE 5-1. ESTABLISH FLOOD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS
AND REQUIRE POTENTIAL INTEGRATION WITH FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEMS
The City should establish a new overlay district in potential flood protection locations and require that development proposals do not prevent the future creation of flood protection infrastructure (see p.106 for more details).
INITIATIVE 9-4. PURSUE STATE BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS TO PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS
The City should ask the Massachusetts Board of Building Regulations and Standards to institute stricter requirements for new or substantially improved buildings in Boston. The key new requirement would be higher minimum elevation of mechanical systems. Similar to Initiative 9-2 (see p.135), this would correct the current approach by defining a building’s mechanical system elevation requirement based on the local Boston flood map for the end of the equipment’s design life.
There are three potential pathways toward incorporating future flood conditions into the state building code, and Boston should pursue the most expedient pathway:
◦ Under Massachusetts General Law Chapter 143 §98, the City may request that the
BBRS allow higher standards to be applied specifically within Boston.
◦ The City can work with regional partners, such as the Metro Boston Climate Preparedness Task Force, to request that the BBRS adopt a Stretch Climate Readiness Code with increased construction requirements. All municipalities in the commonwealth would then have the option of adopting the Stretch Climate Readiness Code.
◦ The City can work with regional partners, such as the Metro Boston Climate Preparedness Task Force, to recommend that the BBRS incorporate higher standards into the building code throughout the commonwealth.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 137

INITIATIVE 9-5. INCORPORATE FUTURE CLIMATE CONDITIONS INTO AREA PLANS
The Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should incorporate future climate considerations into major neighborhood planning efforts across the city, including Strategic Planning Areas, Planned Development Areas, Municipal Harbor Plans, and Institutional Master Plans, which are ultimately codified in zoning. Long-term projections for extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding must all be considered as key variables for planning the future of Boston’s neighborhoods.
For Municipal Harbor Plans, which set requirements for building dimensions, public access, and public benefits for waterfront areas, the consideration of future coastal and riverine flooding is particularly important. Future plans should ensure that, as
sea levels rise, public access areas are not reduced. Public access areas should be elevated above future high tide elevations and either raised above the
PFE or constructed to withstand future inundation, including saltwater tolerant plantings, paving, and equipment. Municipal Harbor Plans should also investigate the possibility of requiring the elevation of entire waterfront sites, a strategy that can provide flood risk reduction for inland areas but must be evaluated for each site to avoid increasing flood risk for adjacent properties (see Initiatives 5-1 and 5-3, pp.106 and 110).
Strategy 10: Retrofit existing buildings
Context: The Challenge of Retrofitting Boston’s Buildings
Boston’s existing building stock is diverse. It includes a broad range of owner types that have different levels of both building management expertise and access to financing to undertake building- and site-scale resilience improvements. Many buildings are historic, and while still able
to adapt, such buildings face unique challenges in doing so while maintaining their historic character and architectural significance. In the near term, over 2,000 buildings across Boston have at least a
1 percent annual chance of inundation by coastal and riverine flooding, and almost 9,000 are exposed to frequent stormwater flooding. Considering that Boston has many older buildings not adapted for flooding or extreme heat risks, the need for retrofits is great. The City should work with property owners to promote access to the information and financial resources that they need to prepare their buildings for climate change.
RELATED INITIATIVE:
INITIATIVE 3-2. LAUNCH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS AND USERS
The City should develop and run an education program to inform property owners and other groups about current and future climate risks facing their buildings and actions they can undertake
to increase their preparedness (see p.95 for more details).
INITIATIVE 10-1. ESTABLISH A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM FOR PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS
The City should establish a resilience audit program to help property owners identify potential building- and site-level resilience actions to address coastal and riverine flooding, stormwater flooding,
and extreme heat. Through the Climate Ready Buildings Education Program, the City should encourage all at-risk property owners to evaluate their resilience.
To start, the City should prioritize the over 2,000 buildings that are exposed to coastal flooding
at 9 inches of sea level rise under at least the 1 percent annual chance event. To further guide prioritization within this group, it should take into account exposure under more frequent events (monthly high tide and the 10 percent annual chance event), the criticality of functions housed within the building, exposure of
socially vulnerable populations, and expected physical damages. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost-effective, building- specific improvements to reduce flood risk,
such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs
or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include
a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements. This would be similar to the combination of energy audit requirements for large buildings in the
City’s Building Energy Reporting and Disclosure Ordinance (BERDO) and the subsidized, voluntary energy audits offered through the Renew Boston program.
Audits offered through a City program could include prequalified firms to conduct the resilience audits, reduced-cost audits for owners that demonstrate high levels of risk and financial
need, and efforts to combine climate resilience audits with energy efficiency audits. Key internal partners for this effort include the Department of Neighborhood Development for at-risk affordable multifamily residential owners, the Boston
  PRECEDENT: ALLOWING MUNICIPALITIES TO ADOPT HIGHER BUILDING CODE STANDARDS (MASSACHUSETTS STRETCH ENERGY CODE)
The Commonwealth adopted the Massachusetts Stretch Energy Code in 2009. It is an alternative stronger energy code that municipalities can choose to use instead of the base code. It increases efficiency requirements for all new residential and many new commercial buildings and for residential additions and renovations that trigger building code compliance. The code was adopted by the City of Boston in November 2010.
138 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 CURRENT AREA PLANNING INITIATIVES
The BPDA works with communities throughout the city to create area plans that guide long- term growth in Boston’s neighborhoods. Three current planning initiatives are PLAN: Dudley Square; PLAN: South Boston Dorchester Avenue; and PLAN: Jamaica Plain / Roxbury. Among the many community priorities addressed in these and other plans, the BPDA should consider future climate conditions, including coastal flooding, stormwater flooding, and extreme heat, in order to help neighborhoods prepare.
A NOTE ON BUILDING REGULATIONS AND INCENTIVES
Many of the regulatory changes included here may increase the short-term costs of real estate development in Boston, even
as they decrease risk and flood insurance costs. An alternative approach the City may pursue is to raise some required minimum standards, while offering incentives that motivate developers to exceed minimum standards. The City must think carefully about what resilience actions should be incentivized, as opposed to required. Developers may require incentives to
take resilience actions if some of the benefits of such actions accrue to other property owners, or outside the developers’ timeframe for evaluating investments.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 139

 RESILIENCY IMPROVEMENTS: COST AND FEASIBILITY FACTORS
Home Center and Renew Boston
for at-risk low- to moderate-income owner-occupants, and the Economic Development Department’s Main Streets program for at-risk small businesses. Finally, the City should explore the creation of a system for disclosure of appropriate information from climate resilience audits, modeled after BERDO.
There are a number of factors that drive the cost and feasibility of resilience improvements. The table on page 68 summarizes factors related
to coastal and riverine and riverine flooding, which generally presents a greater risk of structural damage to buildings than do the other hazards analyzed by Climate Ready Boston.
 FACTOR
CONSIDERATIONS
Flood Risk
Annual chance flood depths
 Higher flood depths present greater risk to buildings and reduce the range of potential feasible solutions.
 Flooding frequency
Intermittent floods require different design solutions than regular flooding at high tide.
 Wave action
 Wave action increases flood depths, adds force against buildings, and potentially introduces debris. Wave action also impacts height and load requirements.
 Moving water and channelization
 Floodwaters can maintain significant momentum as they move landward, and can be channelized by solid foundations and other obstructions, resulting in increased velocity and volume of flow directed onto adjacent properties and infrastructure.
Structural
Structure type
 Structure type is an important factor in determining if dry flood-proofing, wet flood- proofing, or elevation is feasible.
 Location of critical systems
The current location and required locations of critical systems are important in developing retrofit solutions.
 Structural integrity
 Structural reinforcement may be necessary but cost prohibitive or technically infeasible depending on the building.
 Codes and standards
  Substantially altering a building may trigger additional code and regulatory requirements that increase project costs.
 Occupancy and operational requirements
The type of use may limit building layout options. For facilities that provide a public service, maintaining continuity of existing services is important and may lead to prioritization of mitigation actions that minimize impacts to current operations. ADA access and universal design considerations must be incorporated into resilient retrofits of public facilities.
 Historic status
  The historic status of the building may affect project design.
   140 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAMS
Existing Models in Boston
The City can leverage its existing energy efficiency audit programs as models for resilience audits. Renew Boston is
a public-private partnership between the City, Eversource (formerly NStar), National Grid, Mass Save, community-based nonprofits, and Mass Save–certified contractors. The City launched the program in 2009, and it is funded by ratepayers through state requirements. Renew Boston offers free on-site energy efficiency audits (home energy assessments) to owners of single-family homes and small multifamily buildings with up to four units. Renters also are able to request audits. During the audit, the designated energy advisor may install energy-saving lightbulbs and power strips, low-flow shower and faucet heads, and programmable thermostats. The advisor then sends a follow-up report summarizing further recommended energy efficiency improvements and available funding sources. Through Mass Save, owners are eligible for a 75 percent discount (up to $2,000) for insulation and air-sealing services, with owners of two- or three-family buildings or condo owners complete recommended improvements building-wide able
to receive a larger “whole building” discount. In the first half of 2016, Renew Boston completed more than 1,700 home energy assessments for owners and renters. Renew Boston also works with small businesses and large condominium associations and cooperatives. It offers a direct-install program that can pay for up to 70 percent of the total cost for retrofitting lighting and mechanical systems.
To guide the types of resilience improvements recommended under the audit program, the City can leverage existing responses to the Boston Planning and Development Agency’s Climate Preparedness Checklist, plus two key reports by
the Green Ribbon Commission and A Better City, “Building Resilience in Boston” (2013) and “Enhancing Resilience in Boston” (2015). The reports identified potential resilience actions that can be undertaken at the building and site level, their benefits, and their costs.
New York City Neighborhoods Multifamily-Specific Resiliency Technical Assistance Program
In partnership with the New York State Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery, the Center for New York City Neighborhoods launched the Multifamily-Specific Technical Assistance Program (TAP) as a pilot program in 2016. The pilot program will provide 100 multifamily property owners serving low- to moderate-income residents in Sandy-impacted communities with on-site resilience audits by qualified engineering and building services firms, followed by one-on-one counseling
to provide a set of recommendations for building resilience improvements based on the audit findings. Under a separate program, the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery also is working with community-based organizations to provide resiliency counseling to single-family building owners.
Source: “Request for Proposal for Resilience Counseling.” Center for New York City Neighborhoods, Inc. June 15, 2016. http://www.renewboston.org/.
Climate Resilience Initiatives 141

INITIATIVE 10-2. PREPARE MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
The Office of Budget Management (OBM), through its capital budget planning, will work with all City departments to prioritize adaptation projects to prepare at-risk municipal facilities for coastal and riverine flooding, stormwater flooding, and extreme heat risks. It is recommended that OBM use the findings from the Climate Ready Boston Vulnerability Assessment (see p.12) and the City’s 2013 identification and prioritization of at-risk municipal facilities to identify at-risk facilities. OBM should prioritize facilities for retrofits based on three factors:
◦ Vulnerability, in terms of the timing and extent of exposure
◦ Consequences of partial or full failure, in terms of the number of users impacted, the likely duration of service interruption, and
KEY MUNICIPAL FACILITIES EXPOSED TO NEAR TERM FLOODING
expected damage to the facility relative to market value or replacement value
◦ Criticality, with highest priority for impacts on life and safety
OBM may want to develop standardized risk scores to quantify, understand, and communicate relative risk among facilities. The OBM should partner with the Public Facilities Department to estimate the costs of adaptation projects. In addition, it should partner with Renew Boston Trust to evaluate the opportunity for resilience improvements to be combined with energy efficiency improvements.
To address coastal and riverine flooding risks,
the City should prioritize adaptation at facilities exposed to flooding in the near term under 9 inches of sea level rise (1 percent or greater annual chance) that demonstrate high levels of criticality. In particular, the City should prioritize adaptation at police, fire, EMS, and Boston Housing Authority
facilities that demonstrate both especially high levels of criticality and high frequency of exposure (e.g., exposed under the average monthly high tide or 10 percent annual chance flood event).
To address extreme heat risks, as well as other causes of power outages, the City should prioritize backup power installation at facilities that demonstrate high levels of criticality. The City should promote solar photovoltaic generation and storage because this method supports reduced greenhouse gas emissions. In particular, the City should prioritize backup power installation at emergency shelters, which include Boston Centers for Youth and Family and Boston Public School facilities that serve as such. The City should also evaluate the need for cooling capacity across its facilities. The City is currently installing solar photovoltaic battery storage to support critical loads for at least three days in the event of an extended power outage at four BCYF facilities that also serve as emergency shelters.
INITIATIVE 10-3. EXPAND BACKUP POWER AT PRIVATE BUILDINGS THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS
The City should support solar photovoltaic generation and storage in private buildings that serve vulnerable populations. These buildings would receive outreach under Initiative 2-3 (see p.92). Targeted facilities should include affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment
centers, daycare facilities, food pantries, and small nonprofit offices, for example.
The Environment Department should leverage past analyses of high-potential locations for solar to identify sites for backup installations. For example, the Community Energy Study identified districts that are suitable for community solar projects based on a high density of rooftop solar potential (i.e., the capacity to support large-scale solar projects with a minimum 500 kW of solar production). The City also has partnered with Mapdwell to identify the rooftop solar potential of all residential and commercial buildings in Boston.
In addition, the Environment Department should partner with Renew Boston Trust to evaluate the opportunity for resilience improvements to be combined with energy efficiency improvements.
INITIATIVE 10-4. DEVELOP TOOLKIT OF BUILDING RETROFIT FINANCING STRATEGIES
Because expanded access to financing will facilitate resilient building retrofits, the City should identify a toolkit of financing strategies that could be used to fund retrofits for both municipal and non- municipal buildings. These financing strategies can tap public, private, and nonprofit capital to make retrofits accessible to Bostonians with a range of incomes.
The City should collaborate with firms conducting resilience audits to develop profiles of retrofit costs by different building types. The profiles should
be used to size the resilience financing need and guide financing strategy development for different building types. The City should then work with key partners, including Boston’s lending, asset management, and insurance communities, to evaluate ways to quantify and monetize the benefits of climate resilience improvements and create a market for resilience in Boston. These benefits can include direct economic gains (i.e.,
  EXPOSURE
BOSTON HOUSING AUTHORITY
FACILITIES AND FUTURE FLOOD EXPOSURE
Boston Housing Authority facilities are among the municipal properties that Boston should adapt
to coastal and riverine flood risk. The City should prioritize adaptation at facilities exposed to flooding in the near term under 9 inches of SLR for high- probability events (10 percent annual chance
event or monthly high tide). The map above shows Boston Housing Authority facilities and the extent of 1 percent annual chance flooding in the late century.
           FOCUS AREA
FACILITY NAME
9 INCHES SLR AMHT
9 INCHES SLR
10% ANNUAL CHANCE STORM
9 INCHES SLR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE STORM
 EAST BOSTON
DOWNTOWN
SOUTH BOSTON
CHARLESTOWN
Heritage Elderly Public Housing
Engine 9, Ladder 2 (Fire)
Police Department District A-7
Ambulance 8
EMS Harbor Patrol
BPD Harbor Patrol
EMS Station 15
      142 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 143

incremental property tax increases), avoided losses (i.e., avoided structural, contents, and inventory damage), and cost savings (i.e., savings from reduced energy and water usage).
Through Renew Boston Trust (see call-out
box), the City should explore ways to subsidize resilience improvements with energy efficiency improvements. The City should also identify ways to incorporate resilience upgrades into planned capital improvements for both public and private buildings and realize cost efficiencies from doing so. For example, the City may be able to incorporate resilience upgrades into housing repair loan programs for low- to moderate-income owner- occupants supported by the Boston Home Center. The Boston Home Center offers permanently deferred interest loans for critical repairs, where the City recovers its costs when the home is sold.
For non-municipal buildings, the City should prioritize developing retrofit financing pathways for buildings that provide a public benefit,
have high levels of exposure, and are likely to experience challenges accessing financing. These buildings include the following:
◦ Affordable housing projects
◦ Non-municipal community facilities, especially those that provide critical services to vulnerable populations (food pantries, daycare centers, substance abuse treatment facilities)
◦ Low- and moderate-income homeowners
◦ Small businesses, especially those serving
low- to moderate-income communities
◦ Historic buildings, where preservation requirements, often important to neighborhood character, may increase retrofit challenges and costs
Strategy 11. Insure buildings against flood damage
Affordable access to appropriate levels of flood insurance coverage is critical to protecting property owners’ investments and neighborhoods’ stability. Property owners with proper and affordable insurance can more easily recover from their losses after a flood event, while those without can face severe financial distress. Furthermore, properties without adequate insurance may remain in a
state of disrepair, leading to negative economic
and social impacts on their neighborhoods.
The National Flood Insurance Program is the primary source of flood insurance for owner- occupants, smaller residential properties, and small businesses. Generally, large commercial businesses carry flood insurance purchased from private insurers.
INITIATIVE 11-1. EVALUATE THE CURRENT FLOOD INSURANCE LANDSCAPE
The City should conduct a study of the current flood insurance landscape in Boston for owner- occupant and multifamily residential buildings to identify affordability challenges created by recent legal changes to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)1 and the projected floodplain expansion. The City should evaluate the level of coverage in current and projected future high-risk floodplains (1 percent annual chance flood event) by number and type of buildings. It should use NFIP policyholder and claims data provided by FEMA to provide a baseline of existing coverage. It should also conduct outreach to property owners, managers, and industry practitioners to provide insight into current understanding of flood insurance laws, level of coverage, understanding of building-level risk, and willingness to undertake building- and site-level adaptations. The City should evaluate strategies to help property owners respond to major increases in insurance premiums.
INITIATIVE 11-2. JOIN THE NATIONAL
FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM
The City should work with FEMA Region I staff
and the Massachusetts Insurance Services Office to begin the process of participation in the National Flood Insurance Program’s (NFIP) Community Rating System (CRS). The CRS is a voluntary incentive program that recognizes and encourages community floodplain management activities that exceed minimum NFIP requirements. Based on the extent of best practices used to reduce damage to insurable property, increase insurance coverage,
and take a comprehensive approach to floodplain management, the CRS discounts citywide NFIP flood insurance premium rates. The discount applies to both public and private purchasers of insurance. In order to enter the CRS, Boston must enter a formal application with NFIP, conduct an inventory of at-risk assets and initiatives in place to address risks, conduct a site visit with FEMA, and engage in a 6- to 12-month evaluation process. Boston has
a site visit scheduled with FEMA this year.
 RENEW BOSTON TRUST
The City created Renew Boston Trust (RBT) in
2016 to expand financing for energy efficiency improvements in Boston by monetizing future savings. In theory, RBT offers a potential pathway to use the savings from energy efficiency improvements to cross-subsidize resilience improvements. Currently, the proposed RBT model is focused on energy efficiency improvements to two types of buildings:
• Municipal buildings: Under the proposed model, City departments with responsibility for buildings will submit energy efficiency capital projects to RBT. RBT will combine projects to create aggregations that meet strict underwriting criteria ensuring their future energy cost savings will cover repayment
of their upfront capital costs. RBT then will establish a performance-based contract with an energy service contractor to design and install the aggregated project, with the contractor guaranteeing that the project will be done on time and deliver the promised savings. The City will advance the cost of
the project, and be reimbursed over time using the savings or contractor guarantee payments.
• Nonprofit institutions that are able to use state and City finance authorities for tax-exempt borrowing: Under the proposed model, groups of smaller nonprofits will join together to submit an aggregated energy efficiency project to RBT, which will review the project structure and confirm that it meets strict underwriting criteria. The nonprofits will then request that
a state or City finance authority pursue financing for the project on their behalf and hold title to it during the repayment period. The authority then will partner with a lender, who will advance the cost of the project,
and establish a performance-based contract with an energy services contractor, who will do the project. The authority will provide the improvement to the nonprofits, and they will repay the lender through passed-through
rent payments. At the end of the repayment period, the nonprofits will purchase the project from the authority.
144 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 145

  INITIATIVE 11-3. ADVOCATE FOR REFORM IN THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM
The City should collaborate with leaders in other major cities on the East Coast to support 2017 reforms to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) that promote flood insurance affordability in Boston. Key items for advocacy include the following:
◦ Taking into account alternative or partial flood mitigation strategies—such as flood- proofing mechanical systems or moving
some mechanical components above the base flood elevation—when determining flood insurance rates, instead of requiring buildings in the 100-year floodplain to comply with all NFIP guidelines in order to realize any rate reductions.
◦ Considering expanding the types of non- residential space that residential buildings are permitted to maintain below the base flood elevation beyond parking, lobbies, storage, and crawl space to potentially include uses that support residential dwelling units, such as laundry rooms, building management offices, or common spaces.10
◦ Establishing a district-scale NFIP Community Rating System so that Boston and other cities can receive credit for improving flood risk management neighborhood by neighborhood.
10 Subsidies for certain NFIP policies are currently being phased out, resulting in premium increases of 18 to 25 percent per year. Certain policies are also facing increasing deductible limits and surcharges. The NFIP requires reauthorization by Congress in 2017 and may be substantially changed.
Image courtesy of Sasaki
146 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Climate Resilience Initiatives 147

 MAYOR MARTIN J. WALSH
Focus Areas
Eight Boston areas where the results of the Vulnerability Assessment and the climate resilience initiatives are applied in more detail to illustrate the risks Boston faces and how Boston can address them.
148 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Image courtesy of Bud Ris
Focus Areas 149
    
Charlestown
Charlestown, located on
a peninsula just northwest
of Downtown Boston, is surrounded by water on three sides. It is bounded to the south by the Charles River, to the north by the Mystic River, and to the east by Boston Harbor. It is connected to Downtown Boston by the Charlestown Bridge and the Leonard P. Zakim Bridge, to Chelsea by Maurice J. Tobin Bridge, and to Everett by the Malden Bridge.
Founded in 1629, Charlestown is the oldest neighborhood in Boston. It was originally a separate town before being annexed by Boston in 1874. Charlestown was originally surrounded almost completely by water, with an inlet of the Charles River (Miller’s River) running along
its southwest edge before intersecting with the Charlestown Neck, a thin strip of land connecting Charlestown Peninsula to East Somerville near Sullivan Square. This inlet has since been largely filled.
In 1800, the U.S. Navy established a shipyard along the eastern waterfront, promoting the growth
of marine industrial uses in Charlestown, along with worker housing. The Charlestown Navy
Yard was extensively used during World War II. The neighborhood then experienced some decline before becoming subject to urban renewal efforts in the 1960s and 1970s, which led to the Navy Yard’s
redevelopment for office, research, and residential uses and removal of the Charlestown Elevated rail line (running along Main Street from City Square to Sullivan Square).
Today, Charlestown is a thriving residential community, with a mixed housing stock consisting of brick and wood-framed row
houses and waterfront condominiums and apartments. Charlestown also hosts the largest public housing development in Boston, the
Bunker Hill Apartments, with 1,100 units for
low- to moderate-income households. Due to its proximity to Downtown and historic housing stock, Charlestown has become attractive to young professionals.
Charlestown’s main commercial corridors lie along Bunker Hill Street and Main Street. It also has major employment hubs at Bunker Hill Community College, the Navy Yard, Spaulding
Rehabilitation Hospital, and the Boston Autoport. The Boston Autoport is located on an 80-acre site at the northeast corner of Charlestown, between the Mystic River and the Little Mystic Channel. To promote and protect water-dependent industrial uses along the Mystic River, the Commonwealth has established a Designated Port Area there. Charlestown also has industrial and commercial uses concentrated south of Rutherford Avenue.
It also includes a number of historic landmarks, such as the Bunker Hill Monument/Monument Square National Register District and the U.S.S. Constitution and U.S.S. Cassin Young on the waterfront.
The City is currently planning roadway design improvements to Rutherford Avenue and Sullivan Square to create a more pedestrian-friendly environment and create opportunities for transit- oriented development adjacent to Sullivan Square.
  Image courtesy of Sasaki
150 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Focus Areas 151

FLOOD PROGRESSION
Charlestown is exposed to climate change
impacts including heat, increased precipitation
and stormwater flooding, and sea level rise and coastal and riverine flooding. Exposure to heat and stormwater flooding are addressed in the Citywide Vulnerability Assessment (see p.12), while exposure and consequences to coastal and riverine flood risk are further discussed in this section.
Charlestown’s exposure to near-term impacts is limited to pockets of flooding near the Charlestown Navy Yard, the Boston Autoport near the Tobin Bridge, and low-lying land east of Sullivan Square.
Significant coastal flooding is likely by later in the century, with most of Charlestown’s waterfront area extending from Cambridge to Somerville projected to be inundated during major coastal storms. Inland flooding would
be greatest through low-lying land immediately east of Sullivan Square, and flooding would also extend through the Charles River Basin if the Charles River Dam were flanked.
9 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
 DEFINITIONS
Near term: Beginning 2030s, assumes 9 inches of sea level rise
Midterm: Beginning 2050s, assumes 21 inches of sea level rise
Long term: Beginning 2070s or later, assumes 36 inches of sea level rise
Exposure: Can refer to people, buildings, infrastructure, and other resources within areas likely to experience hazard impacts. Does not consider conditions that may prevent or limit impacts.
Vulnerability: Refers to how and why people or assets can be affected by a hazard. Requires site-specific information.
Consequence: Illustrates to what extent people or assets can be expected to
be affected by a hazard, as a result of vulnerability and exposure. Consequences can often be communicated in terms of economic losses.
Annualized losses: The sum of the probability-weighted losses for all four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level rise scenario. Probability-weighted losses are the losses for a single event times the probability of that event occurring in a given year.
*For a full list of definitions, refer to the Glossary in the Appendix.
LEGEND
   21 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
 152 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
36 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
Focus Areas 153
  
 Land area in Charlestown exposed to flooding is in
the top three for all coastal neighborhoods throughout the century. Over 50 percent of Charlestown will be exposed to coastal flooding during low- probability storms expected as soon as the 2070s (1 percent annual chance event).
Climate resilience planning must consider the broad flood extents near the waterfront that may affect the diverse mixture of buildings and industries, as well as the entry points for inland flooding near Sullivan Square and the Charles River Dam.
Prior to fill placement, Charlestown was a peninsula of relatively high ground, including
the Bunker Hill neighborhood. In the late 1800s, Charlestown was built outward in all directions, including along the Mystic and Charles Rivers. The majority of Charlestown’s waterfront, composed largely of fill, will be exposed to coastal flooding, especially late in the century.
In the near term, coastal flood extents remain largely along the waterfront edge, with the broadest flood extents near the Charlestown Navy Yard, the Boston Autoport near the Tobin Bridge, and low-lying land east of Sullivan Square. As soon as the 2050s, the areas flooded in low- probability storms will increase by over 150 percent, mostly due to a large expansion of
the floodplain inland via low-lying land near Sullivan Square. Once coastal floods coming from the Mystic River cross Rutherford Avenue, a large expansion of the floodplain is expected to the south, along low-lying area that was filled. More frequent and expansive coastal flooding
in inland areas of Charlestown is expected in
the late century, with a higher probability of
both flooding inland east of Sullivan Square and flooding associated with flanking or overtopping of the Charles River Dam. Areas exposed to low- probability events in the near term will be exposed to high tides later in the century, limiting access to or causing damage in areas like the Charlestown Navy Yard and Boston Harborwalk near Ryan Playground and the Malden Bridge.
154 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 155
  
EXPOSURE
POPULATION & INFRASTRUCTURE
POPULATION AND SOCIAL VULNERABILITY
Charlestown is currently home to more than 16,000 people. Charlestown has relatively lower concentrations of socially vulnerable populations than Boston at large. The exception is households with children, which make up 20 percent of households in the neighborhood compared to
17 percent citywide. The Seaport Academy and Sparrel Elementary School are exposed to low- probability events in the near term and low- probability late-century events, respectively. Impacts to schools may result in lost school
days for children, and parents of small children may opt to miss work and stay home on these
CHARLESTOWN POPULATION EXPOSURE
days. Charlestown has three senior housing developments, one long-term care facility, and six public housing developments where concentrations of elderly, medically ill, and low- to no-income residents live. Portions of two Boston Housing Authority developments, the Charlestown Apartments and Basilica Condos, are expected to be at risk for low-probability flood events later in the century.
In the near term, roughly 350 people currently live in areas expected to be flooded by monthly high tides, the second largest of all neighborhoods. In addition, over 420 people live in areas expected to be flooded by a high-probability flood event (10
percent annual chance), and 1,330 people live in areas expected to be flooded by a low-probability flood event (1 percent annual chance), making Charlestown the fourth most-exposed focus area, behind East Boston, Downtown, and South Boston.
In a significant expansion of risk, over 1,070 people currently live in areas expected to be flooded
by monthly high tides as soon as the 2070s, an increase of roughly three times over the near term. Over 3,920 individuals live in areas expected to
be flooded by high-probability events (10 percent annual chance), and 5,180 people live in areas expected to be flooded by low-probability events (1 percent annual chance). As soon as the 2070s,
close to 500 people may require emergency shelter under low-probability events (1 percent annual chance), a number that outstrips Charlestown’s current 300-person shelter capacity. Furthermore, Charlestown’s existing shelter capacity will be exposed to lower probability events later in the century. The Charlestown Community Center
and emergency shelter will be exposed to low- probability (1 percent chance) mid-century storms, potentially reducing the neighborhood’s current shelter capacity by about 175 people. Available and accessible public shelters and effective communication regarding shelter alternatives will thus be critical to Charlestown residents.
    Image courtesy of Sasaki
 156 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 157

INFRASTRUCTURE
Exposure of Orange Line MBTA stations and I-93 to low-probability mid- century storms and sea level rise may compromise connectivity between Charlestown and Downtown Boston.
Charlestown is separated from the rest of Boston by the Charles River and the Boston Harbor. The neighborhood is connected to Downtown Boston by the MBTA Orange Line, I-93, and Rutherford Avenue. Flooding at both Orange Line stations in Charlestown would not only restrict Downtown access but also access to Bunker Hill Community College, especially for students who rely on the light rail to attend class. If both the Community College and Sullivan Square Stations are rendered inoperable, over 15,000 individuals1 that enter at those stations would be in need of alternative transportation options. This does not include potential impacts and service disruption if flooding penetrates into the transportation corridor.
I-93 and Rutherford Avenue are also two of Charlestown’s three major evacuation routes. Flooding of these areas presents complications to safe evacuation, and avoidance of flooded areas can lead to overstressed and crowded side streets when drivers seek alternative routes. Rutherford
Avenue near Sullivan Square, and the BWSC Sullivan Square stormwater pump station that protects it, are also expected to be exposed to floodwaters in the near future.
The Mystic Generating Station and Charlestown Wind Turbine, which contribute to Greater Boston’s power supply and wastewater operations, will be exposed to low-probability storms in the second half of the century, and frequent storms in the late century.
The Mystic Generating Station is one of Massachusetts’s major non-nuclear electricity generating plants. The facility is expected to be exposed to low-probability events by the second half of the century and more frequent (high- probability) storms later in the century. The station has a sophisticated emergency response plan in place to protect public health and safety in case of a disaster. Nevertheless, liquid natural gas currently from the Everett marine terminal, located across the Mystic River, is critical for operation.2
The Charlestown Wind Turbine generates three million kilowatt hours of electricity per year,
and the power generated is net-metered to offset MWRA electricity costs, savings ratepayers approximately $350,000 a year. Though the turbine
1Based on 2014 MBTA ridership and service statistics. Number only captures station entries and does not include all passengers traveling on the line as it passes through the station.
2Everett’s exposure to coastal storms and sea level rise are not considered within the scope of this project.
itself is not directly exposed to damage from
coastal storms and sea level rise, it is expected to
be surrounded by water during frequent storm
events late century, potentially causing damage
to underground infrastructure that transmits
energy generated, as well as affecting safe access.
Direct flood exposure is not expected at the
DeLauri sewer pump station (where the wind
turbine is located) during this century. The Little
Mystic Combined Sewer Overflow facility may
be exposed to frequent mid-century flooding
but is expected to be able to continue operations
throughout the century, based on MWRA’s
assessment.
Charlestown may experience reduced emergency response capacity as a result of sea level rise.
Charlestown’s only EMS station, the Charlestown Police Station, and one of two fire stations
are expected to be exposed to flood impacts
at various points throughout the century. Maintaining operations at these essential facilities is critical in Charlestown to ensure that public health and safety needs are met during and
after a flood event, especially considering that the neighborhood’s physical connections to the Boston mainland may also be compromised.
All of Charlestown’s hospital and medical research facilities will be exposed to high-probability flood impacts as soon
as the 2050s, as well as late-century tides, impacting access to healthcare as well as some of the neighborhood’s top economic drivers.
Four hospitals and medical research facilities
are located on Charlestown’s waterfront: Beacon Hospice, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, MGH Institute of Health Professionals, and the Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging. Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital is a 132-bed rehabilitation teaching hospital owned by Partners HealthCare that opened in 2013. It was designed to be resilient and is expected to be protected in a low-probability event in the near future. Existing flood mitigation measures at the site are expected to cut late-
century annualized storm impacts in half.
3Inferred from critical flood elevation data provided by MWRA. 4Based on Climate Ready Boston analysis.
158 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 159
3
4

EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCES
BUILDINGS AND ECONOMY
RISK TO BUILDINGS
The majority of exposed buildings in Charlestown are residential and mixed-use structures.
Charlestown is mostly residential in character; residential-only properties make up nearly 60 percent of the neighborhood’s total number of structures and 60 percent of the current real estate market value.5 Charlestown’s housing stock is made up of primarily low-rise row houses and wood-framed two- or three-family buildings. Though much of Charlestown’s housing is elevated, structures typically have basements or below-grade finished space and are often vulnerable through windows at grade.
Charlestown faces risk from both coastal storms and rising sea levels. In the near term, the community can expect 20 structures exposed during monthly high tides and 140 structures exposed to flooding during a low-probability flood event (1 percent annual chance). As soon as the 2070s, over 50 percent of the land area is expected to be exposed to flooding from a low-probability flood event (1 percent annual chance event), with close to 700 structures potentially exposed. More than half of the exposed structures are residential or mixed-use in nature. In addition, as soon as the 2070s, over 130 existing structures are expected to be exposed to monthly high tides.
5These statistics do not include residential space in mixed-use buildings.
CHARLESTOWN BUILDING EXPOSURE
While Charlestown is a smaller-scale neighborhood than some of the other focus areas considered, it is still in the top four focus areas for expected annualized structure and content losses in the near term, with $8.5M, compared to $62.6M in South Boston, $42.7M in Downtown, and $11.8M in East Boston.
    CHARLESTOWN MARKET VALUE EXPOSURE
 160 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 161
 Image courtesy of Sasaki

 RISK TO THE ECONOMY
As of 2014, there are over 12,200 jobs in Charlestown, and associated industries contribute over $2.5 billion of output (sales and revenues) into the city’s economy annually. The Charlestown economy is well balanced, as no single industry comprises more than an 8 percent share of employment or output within the neighborhood.
Charlestown’s economy is most vulnerable in medium- and long-term climate scenarios. Based on the neighborhood’s current economy and building stock conditions, $8 million in annualized output loss and approximately 50 positions in annualized employment loss are expected toward the end of the century. Scientific research and development, accounting, and insurance-related services rank among top industries expected to
be impacted. Losses have been calculated strictly based on expected flooding to structures, as opposed to egress and utility lines, and cascading loss of function impacts are not considered in the analysis.6 In the second half of the century, the site of a current martial arts training center is expected to be heavily impacted by floodwaters and joins top industries expected to be affected by coastal storm events.
6More-detailed analysis would be required to quantify expected loss of function impacts to utilities and transportation outside of economic loss derived from direct physical damage to structures.
CHARLESTOWN ECONOMIC LOSSES
Charlestown is consistently expected to be among the top five focus areas most at risk to coastal flooding throughout the century in terms of land area, people, and buildings exposed.
Due to the prevalence of residential structures exposed to coastal flood impacts, Charlestown’s economy is most vulnerable to medium- and long-term sea level rise scenarios.
 ECONOMIC RISK ASSUMPTIONS
Job and output loss includes direct, indirect, and induced consequences of flood impacts. Direct results are impacts felt within a neighborhood, while indirect and induced results are those expected to be felt throughout Suffolk County as a result
of changes in spending patterns. Results
for both job and output losses are the sum
of annualized values for the four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level
rise scenario. This represents a lower-bound estimate for several reasons. First, not all probabilistic events are considered. Second, the analysis assumes that all impacted businesses eventually reopen, though FEMA estimates that almost 40 percent of small businesses—and up to 25 percent of all businesses—never reopen after experiencing flood impacts. Third, only building areas directly impacted by floodwater are assumed to experience business interruption. This does not consider interruptions of businesses due to loss of power or utility functions. Finally, the analysis only considers existing populations, businesses, and buildings and does not include projections for future growth. Refer to the Appendix for a more detailed explanation of the exposure and consequence analysis.
  CHARLESTOWN ANNUALIZED LOSSES
  INDUSTRY
  ANNUALIZED LOSS OF ECONOMIC OUTPUT
  Scientific research Accounting services Insurance agencies Fitness and recreation Restaurants
All other industries
Total
$500,000 $400,000 $300,000 $300,000 $200,000 $6,700,000 $78,900,000
              162 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 163

  EXPECTED ANNUALIZED LOSSES TO STRUCTURES AND CONTENTS
36 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE AT 10%, 2%, 1%, 0.1% ANNUAL CHANCE COASTAL FLOOD EVENTS.
   CHARLESTOWN ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
   164 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 165
Each circle represents annualized losses suffered by an individual building. Larger circle size indicates higher contents and structures losses. Annualized losses take into consideration the annual probability of an event occurring, as well as the projected impacts of such an event.
 Probable annualized losses are based on generalized assumptions, as opposed to site-specific assessment of structures. Site-specific evaluations of vulnerability are beyond the scope of this assessment and should be reserved for detailed evaluation of specific resilience initiatives or a next phase of this project.
 
CHARLESTOWN
APPLICATION OF RESILIENCE INITIATIVES
PROTECTED SHORES
DEVELOP LOCAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE PLANS TO SUPPORT DISTRICT-SCALE CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The City should develop a local climate resilience plan for Charlestown to support district-scale climate adaptation. The plan should include the following:
◦ Community engagement through a local climate resilience committee, leveraging existing community organizations, and efforts such as Boston Harbor Now’s series of adaptation planning workshops in Charlestown.
◦ Land-use planning for future flood protection systems, including Flood Protection Overlay Districts in strategically important “flood breach points” identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Flood protection feasibility studies, evaluating district-scale flood protection, including at locations identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Infrastructure adaptation planning through
the Infrastructure Coordination Committee. For Charlestown, the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation is a key partner, as it controls the New Charles River Dam.
◦ Coordination with other plans, including Imagine Boston 2030, GoBoston 2030, Special Planning Areas, and any potential Municipal Harbor Plan process.
◦ Development of financing strategies and governance structures to support district-scale adaptation.
◦ Partnering with Cambridge and Somerville, which are adjacent to Charlestown and connected to Charlestown by inundation pathways.
ESTABLISH FLOOD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS AND REQUIRE POTENTIAL INTEGRATION WITH FLOOD PROTECTION
The Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should petition the Boston Zoning Commission to create new Flood Protection Overlay Districts in areas that
are strategically important for potential future flood protection infrastructure (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below). Within a Flood Protection Overlay District, a developer would be required to submit a study of how a proposed project could be integrated into a future flood protection system; options may include raising and reinforcing the development site or providing room for a future easement across the site.
To reduce the risk of coastal flooding at major inundation points, the City should study the feasibility of constructing district-scale flood protection at the primary flood entry points in Charlestown (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below for a preliminary identification of locations and potential benefits).
These feasibility studies should take place in the context of local climate resilience plans, featuring engagement with local community stakeholders, coordination with infrastructure adaptation, and considerations of how flood protection would impact or be impacted by neighborhood character and growth. Examples of prioritization criteria include the timing of flood risk, consequences for
people and economy, social equity, financial feasibility, and potential for additional benefits beyond flood risk reduction.
  PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT- SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
 166 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 167

 North Charlestown
  POTENTIAL DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION LOCATIONS7
See the District-Scale Flood Protection Systems Overview section (p.330) for a citywide perspective on district-scale flood protection. District-scale flood protection is only one piece of a multilayered solution that includes prepared and connected communities, resilient infrastructure, and adapted buildings.
In the near term, exposure to coastal flooding is limited to specific waterfront areas. As soon as the 2050s, combined flood protection at two key locations will become critical:
◦ North Charlestown, addressing a major flood entry point between I-93 and Bunker Hill Street, near Sullivan Square
◦ The New Charles River Dam, addressing future overtopping or flanking of the dam
LOCATIONS
◦ The North Charlestown Location focuses
on a major flood entry point at low ground between I-93 and Bunker Hill Street, near Sullivan Square. Potential flood protection solutions could include the following elements: permanent boundary protection along Bunker Hill Street; regraded and elevated streets near flood entry points; integrated flood protection and transportation improvements at Sullivan Square; a deployable barrier for the Route
99 trench; and temporary barriers at the intersection of Medford Street and Bunker Hill Street, the Engine 32/Ladder 9 entrance, and the Schrafft Center driveway.
◦ The New Charles River Dam Location, also described in the Downtown focus area section (see p. 216), addresses flooding by the Zakim Bridge / New Charles River Dam. Potential flood protection solutions could include a tide barrier across the mouth of Miller’s River, a tide gate and connecting flood protection system just west of Littoral Way, or a deployable barrier across the railroad right-of-way connecting Charlestown and North Station.
7 These preliminary coastal flood protection concepts build off of recommendations of the MassDOT-FHWA Pilot Project Report and are based on a high-level analysis
of existing topography, rights-of-way, and urban and environmental conditions. Important additional factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions, and zoning as well as any potential external impacts as a result of the project have not been studied in detail. As described in Initiatives 5-2 and 5-3 (pp. 106, 110), detailed feasibility studies, including appropriate public and stakeholder engagement, are required in order to better understand the costs and benefits of flood protection in each location.
8 Additional flood protection may be required for flood events more severe than the 1 percent annual chance flood. See Appendix for more detailed information on expected effectiveness of flood protection systems, including analysis of additional flood protection locations and flood frequencies.
9 Benefits of district-scale flood protection would be modest.
DETAILED CONSIDERATIONS
◦ Modest near-term benefits for North Charlestown protection: At 9 inches of sea level rise (SLR), flood protection at North Charlestown provides modest benefits in terms of economic losses avoided for the
1 percent annual chance event. To protect against near-term lower-probability events (0.1 percent annual chance event) in Charlestown, interventions at both North Charlestown and the New Charles River Dam may be needed,10 as flooding from the Charles River and Boston Harbor proceed inland. At 21 inches of SLR
or above, protection at Locations 5 and 7 will likely be necessary to provide protection beyond high-probability flood events (10 percent annual chance).
◦ Industrial areas protected at North Charlestown: Since the area benefitting from independent flood protection at North Charlestown without the New Charles River Dam protection is relatively small and primarily industrial, direct impact on population is likely limited. Evaluation
of flood protection options may require consideration of possible brownfield mitigation and reduction of environmental contaminants.
◦ Many neighborhoods benefit from dam flood protection: Flood protection at the New Charles River Dam could simultaneously protect parts of northern Downtown, southern Downtown, Charlestown, the Charles River neighborhoods, and the South End and Roxbury.
◦ Requirement for multiple protection locations in the late century: A flood protection system at the New Charles River Dam is expected to provide significant protection in other neighborhoods against
the 1 percent chance event until later in the century. However, to protect Charlestown from near-term to mid-century flooding, interventions at North Charlestown will likely be required.
10 While it is expected that flood protection that would not be independently effective would have some effect on flood loss, this effect could be positive or negative, and understanding the extent of the effect would require more detailed evaluation.
As such, any benefits or costs above the identified level of protection (the point beyond which the flood protection measure can no longer maintain independent effectiveness) have not been evaluated.
New Charles River Dam
  SLR SCENARIO
  DISTRICT SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD8
  9” SLR (2030s–2050s)
21” SLR (2050s–2100s)
36” SLR
(2070s or later)
None9
North Charlestown and New Charles River Dam Locations combined
North Charlestown and New Charles River Dam Locations combined
     168 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 169

PREPARED & CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
CONDUCT AN OUTREACH CAMPAIGN TO PRIVATE FACILITIES THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS TO SUPPORT PREPAREDNESS AND ADAPTATION
The City should conduct outreach to managers of facilities in Charlestown that serve significant concentrations of vulnerable populations and are not required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans under current regulations. Targeted facilities will include affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment centers, daycare facilities, food pantries, and small nonprofit offices, for example. An illustrative example
of the type of facilities to which the City might conduct outreach include Bright Horizons Preschool at the Schrafft Center near Sullivan Square, which will be exposed to near-term damage from sea level rise and coastal flooding and access issues associated with near-term stormwater flooding.11
The City should reach out to small businesses in Charlestown exposed to stormwater flooding risk in the near term or coastal flooding risk under a 1 percent annual chance event at 9 inches of SLR to help them develop business continuity plans, evaluate insurance coverage needs, and identify low-cost physical adaptations. While Main Street, Charlestown’s primary commercial corridor, is not exposed to flooding under a 1 percent annual chance event at 9 inches of SLR, there are 19 commercial buildings and 16 mixed-use buildings potentially hosting small businesses exposed.
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
ESTABLISH INFRASTRUCTURE COORDINATION COMMITTEE
The Infrastructure Coordination Committee (ICC) should support coordinated adaptation planning for Charlestown’s
key infrastructure systems, including transportation, water
and sewer, energy, telecommunications, and environmental assets. The City should support the MBTA in conducting a full asset-level vulnerability assessment of its system, including
the Orange Line. While Charlestown’s two Orange Line stops (Community College and Sullivan Square) are not directly exposed to coastal flooding at 9 inches of SLR under the 1 percent annual chance event, flooding of tunnels and stations in Downtown Boston could impede residents’ ability to access jobs and essential services during flood events.
The Office of Emergency Management should work with the Boston Transportation Department, Department of Public Works, and private utilities to provide guidance on critical roads to prioritize for adaptation planning, including those that are part of the city’s evacuation network and are required to restore or maintain critical services. With 9 inches of SLR under a 1 percent annual chance flood event, Interstate 93, North Washington Street, and Alford Street will all be exposed to coastal flooding.
The 2016 Boston Community Energy Study identified Charlestown’s Main Street corridor as a potential location for
an emergency microgrid, based on its concentration of critical facilities. The study also identified an area near Sullivan Square as a location for an Energy Justice microgrid. Small portions of the Main Street corridor site may be exposed to coastal flooding from the 1 percent annual chance event in the near term. The Sullivan Square site has a small area exposed under the 1 percent annual chance event with 9 inches of SLR, with exposure significantly increasing with 21 and 36 inches of SLR. The Environment Department can work with local stakeholders and utility providers to explore these locations.
   EXPAND BOSTON’S SMALL BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
PROVIDE GUIDANCE ON PRIORITY EVACUATION
AND SERVICE ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE ICC
CONDUCT FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
  170 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 171
11The City did not review the extent of existing preparedness planning as part of this study.

ADAPTED BUILDINGS
PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS FOR PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
Upon amending the zoning code to support climate readiness (see Initiative 9-2, p.135), the Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should immediately notify all developers with projects in the development pipeline in the future floodplain that they may alter their plans in a manner consistent with the zoning amendments (e.g., elevating their first-floor ceilings without violating building height limits), without needing to restart the BPDA permitting process.
Currently, 17 residential and 8 commercial buildings
are under construction or permitted in Charlestown, representing 267 additional housing units and 1.8 million square feet of new commercial space.
The Boston Planning and Development Agency should incorporate future climate considerations (long-term projections for extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding) into major planning
efforts in Charlestown. These efforts include the planned transportation improvements to Rutherford Avenue and Sullivan Square and the redevelopment of the Bunker Hill Apartments.
ESTABLISH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS, SUPPORTED BY A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate
risks and actions they can undertake to address these risks. To prepare for the most immediate risks, the City should prioritize audits for buildings with at least a 1 percent annual chance of exposure to coastal and riverine flooding in the near term, under 9 inches of sea level rise. In Charlestown, this includes 142 structures, with 17 percent of these consisting of residential and mixed-use buildings that house residents. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost-effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements.
The Office of Budget Management should work with City departments to prioritize upgrades to municipal facilities in Charlestown that demonstrate high levels of vulnerability (in terms of the timing and extent of exposure), consequences
of partial or full failure, and criticality (with highest priority for impacts on life and safety) from coastal flooding in the near term. In the near term, at 9 inches of SLR, EMS Station
5 will be exposed to flooding under the 1 percent annual flood event. The Charlestown Navy Yard, which is owned by the BPDA, is also exposed in the near term under monthly high tide. To address extreme heat risks, the City should prioritize backup power installation at municipal facilities that demonstrate high levels of criticality, including specific Boston Centers for Youth and Family and Boston Public School facilities that serve as emergency shelters.
  INCORPORATE FUTURE CLIMATE CONDITIONS INTO AREA PLANS AND ZONING AMENDMENTS
 PREPARE MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
 172 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 173

Charles River Neighborhoods
The Charles River focus area consists of the neighborhoods that lie along the Charles River, including Beacon Hill, Back Bay, Fenway/Kenmore, and Allston/Brighton.
These neighborhoods have been grouped in a focus area because they are all expected to be exposed to flooding upon overtopping or flanking of the Charles River Dam.
Beacon Hill is located in the center of the Shawmut Peninsula. The area originally had three hills, two of which were leveled for Beacon Hill development. Construction of the Massachusetts State House occurred on the south slope in the 1790s. Residential squares were laid out according to the English model on the north slope.
The Back Bay neighborhood was created through fill during the late nineteenth century, adding 450 acres to the city. In 1814, the Boston and Roxbury Mill Corporation started building a dam blocking the tidal Back Bay, which extended from Brookline to Boston Common. The dam was economically unsuccessful, so Boston started filling in the tidal area in 1857, with the process completed by 1882. Back Bay became an elegant residential district, with blocks of three- to four-story brownstones organized along linear boulevards (Beacon Street, Marlborough Street, and Commonwealth Avenue), according to the Parisian model.
Fenway/Kenmore consists of land annexed from Brookline during the 1870s, as well as land filled in during the creation of the Back Bay Fens, the first park in Frederick Law Olmstead’s Emerald Necklace. Olmstead designed the Fens, a set of constructed marshes, to address drainage and sanitary challenges associated with the Muddy River, which flows into the Charles River. While originally intended as a high-end residential district, Fenway/Kenmore subsequently attracted a large number of educational and cultural institutions. Fenway/Kenmore is connected to Allston/Brighton through a small strip of land along Brookline. Allston was annexed by Boston in 1874. During the 1800s, Allston/Brighton
had significant industry, with stockyards, slaughterhouses, and meatpacking operations in Allston and northeast Brighton.
The Charles River focus area is unified by the Charles River. The first Charles River Dam was completed in 1910, converting it from a tidal estuary into a freshwater basin. The dam served
to control the surface water level in the basin and upstream and to prevent seawater from the Boston Harbor from entering. The Charles River Esplanade was constructed at the same time to take advantage of the new recreational possibilities created by
the basin. The Esplanade has been expanded and enhanced over time, with the present-day Hatch Shell added in 1940, although the Esplanade did lose some land to the construction of Storrow Drive in 1949. Storrow Drive, a high-speed access road, separates Beacon Hill, the Back Bay, and Fenway/ Kenmore from the river. Soldiers Field Road does
the same in Allston. The New Charles River Dam was completed in 1978.
Today, Beacon Hill and the Back Bay are among the most expensive residential neighborhoods
in Boston. Charles Street, which extends from Massachusetts General Hospital to the Public Garden, is Beacon Hill’s primary commercial corridor. Back Bay has commercial corridors along Newbury Street, Boylston Street, St. James Street, and Huntington Avenue. Fenway/Kenmore is a mixed-use district, with a diverse housing stock of brownstones, brick row housing, and newer apartment and condominium towers. Allston is also a mixed-use district that has experienced conversion of industrial uses to commercial, residential, and institutional uses over time and has also become a site of recent expansion by Harvard University.
 174 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 175
 Image courtesy of Sasaki

FLOOD PROGRESSION
In the near-term and through the middle of the century, buildings and infrastructure in the Charles River focus area have limited exposure to coastal flooding.
The Charles River neighborhoods are exposed to climate change impacts including heat, increased precipitation and stormwater flooding, and sea level rise and coastal and riverine flooding. Exposure to heat and stormwater flooding
are addressed in the Citywide Vulnerability Assessment (see p.12), while exposure and consequences to coastal and riverine flood risk are further discussed in this section.
The primarily flood pathway in the Charles River neighborhoods is around and over the Charles River Dam. The New Charles River Dam was constructed in 1978 and is a complex sluice, lock, and pump system used to manage freshwater draining from the Charles River Basin, salt water from the Boston Harbor, and vessel navigation.1
In the event of a storm, pumps are activated to proactively reduce the water level to accommodate for surge.
Because of the presence of the Charles River Dam, the Charles River neighborhoods have limited exposure to coastal flooding through the middle of the century. By the end of the century, Beacon Hill, Back Bay, Fenway/Kenmore, and Allston/Brighton, Charlestown, and Cambridge are expected to be exposed to flooding by flanking and overtopping of the dam for low-probability events. In low- probability flood events (1 percent annual chance) expected later in the century, flooding from the dam is expected to enter inland Boston through the Public Garden, contributing to the extensive flooding expected to collect in the South End from Fort Point Channel and Dorchester Bay during
the same time frame (refer to the 36-inch flood exposure map). Very low-probability events (0.1 percent annual chance) are expected to have high enough storm surge that lands along the majority of the Charles River will be exposed to flooding.
In the near term and through the middle of the century, buildings and infrastructure in the Charles River neighborhoods have or will have limited exposure to coastal flooding.
Of the Charles River neighborhoods, Allston has the greatest exposure in the near term due to low-lying open space. By the end of
the century, the Charles River neighborhoods will begin to have some flood exposure to 1 percent annual chance events and may have hundreds of acres exposed to very low- probability events (0.1 percent chance).
 DEFINITIONS
Near term: Beginning 2030s, assumes 9 inches of sea level rise
Midterm: Beginning 2050s, assumes 21 inches of sea level rise
Long term: Beginning 2070s or later, assumes 36 inches of sea level rise
Exposure: Can refer to people, buildings, infrastructure, and other resources within areas likely to experience hazard impacts. Does not consider conditions that may prevent or limit impacts.
Vulnerability: Refers to how and why people or assets can be affected by a hazard. Requires site-specific information.
Consequence: Illustrates to what extent people or assets can be expected to
be affected by a hazard, as a result of vulnerability and exposure. Consequences can often be communicated in terms of economic losses.
Annualized losses: The sum of the probability-weighted losses for all four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level rise scenario. Probability-weighted losses are the losses for a single event times the probability of that event occurring in a given year.
*For a full list of definitions, refer to the Glossary on p. Y.
  Image courtesy of Sasaki
176 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 177
1 MassDOT FHWA Report citation: Bosma, Kirk, et. al. “MassDOT-FHWA Pilot Project Report: Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessments and Adaptation Options for the Central Artery.” Jun. 2015, https://www.massdot.state. ma.us/Portals/8/docs/environmental/SustainabilityEMS/Pilot_Project_Report_ MassDOT_FHWA.pdf.

  9 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
LEGEND
  Later in the century, exposure of the Charles River neighborhoods to severe coastal storms with a low probability of occurrence increases significantly due to the possibility of overtopping and flanking of the Charles River Dam.
Climate resilience planning must consider that the primary flow pathway is over and around the Charles River dam. Adaptation of or around the dam would also benefit Charlestown, Downtown, and Cambridge.
21 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
  178 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
36 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
Focus Areas 179
  
EXPOSURE
POPULATION & INFRASTRUCTURE
CHARLES RIVER POPULATION EXPOSURE
POPULATION & SOCIAL VULNERABILITIES
Residents of the Charles River neighborhoods comprise about 22 percent of Boston’s overall population, or about 142,000 people. The Charles River neighborhoods are relatively affluent compared to the city as a whole; it has just one public housing development and 25 percent of the population in low- to no-income categories. Nevertheless, Back Bay and Beacon Hill have among the highest percentage of people with a medical illness (42 percent) and older adults (12 percent) throughout Boston.
Shelter needs in the Charles River neighborhoods are expected to be around 200 individuals for
the area for the low-probability (1 percent annual chance) event later this century. Seven public emergency shelters are located within the Charles River neighborhoods, with the capacity to shelter 1,000 individuals. Only the Boston Arts Academy shelter will be exposed to the 0.1 percent annual chance event, which has a capacity of 151. The remaining shelters are not expected to be exposed to flood impacts and may be able to shelter some residents from other neighborhoods in an event. Unexposed colleges, universities, and hospitals in the Charles River neighborhoods may be able to provide shelter as well.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Transportation systems within the Charles River neighborhoods are not likely exposed to coastal flooding and sea level rise until later in the century. Even so, major impacts are only expected for low-probability events.
2Based on 2014 MBTA ridership and service statistics. Number only captures station entries and does not include all passengers traveling on the line as is passes through the station.
As soon as the 2050s, parts of Storrow Drive
are expected to be exposed to low-probability storms. Later in the century, additional sections of Storrow Drive, as well as sections of Beacon Street and River Street in Back Bay and Beacon Hill, may be impacted by low-probability flood events (1 percent chance). Flooding along these roads will not only impact safe evacuation from the area,
but potential damage and traffic interruptions
may also affect crosstown connections and quick access to Downtown. Delivery of resources such as food supplies and research materials may also be disrupted in the case of flooded roads surrounding the campuses, in addition to student commutes to Boston University, Harvard’s Business School and Stadium, and the Soldiers Field athletic area. Very low-probability flood events (0.1 percent annual chance) later in the century have the potential
to impact Mass Pike, which may further limit transportation connections Downtown.
Portions of MBTA’s Green Line within Back Bay and Beacon Hill, including the Arlington and Prudential T Stations, are exposed to flood impacts later in the century. The Green Line runs at grade for much of the western portion of its route and also has the potential to be interrupted by stormwater flooding between Packard’s Corner and Harvard Avenue Stations. Service interruptions at the aforementioned stations could result in over 12,000 daily riders2 needing alternative transportation, especially affecting those who use the Green Line to commute from Boston’s inland neighborhoods
to Downtown. Expected impacts to transportation patterns will grow significantly with a 0.1 percent chance event later in the century. Green Line exposure will extend from Back Bay and Beacon Hill into Fenway/Kenmore, while Red Line
connections from Back Bay and Beacon Hill to Cambridge may also be affected by flooding.
Charles River emergency response assets are not expected to be exposed to flood impacts this century.
Areas adjacent to the Charles River neighborhoods with emergency response facilities exposed to coastal flood damage include Downtown, the South End, and northern Roxbury. If emergency response facilities in these areas are impacted by flooding, fire, police, and EMS stations in the Charles River neighborhoods may be called upon for support,
in which case capacity, response times, and transportation routes between neighborhoods must be better understood.
Very low-probability events expected later in the century may impact many colleges and universities in the Charles River neighborhoods; colleges and universities provide the second-largest number of jobs in the area.
The Charles River neighborhoods are home to many well-known colleges and universities, including Boston University, portions of Harvard and Northeastern University, and other institutions associated with the Longwood Medical Area such as Simmons College and Emmanuel College. All of the aforementioned campuses have at least some portion exposed to the 0.1 percent chance event
per the statistical expectation later in the century. Damages to campus assets or roads may not only disrupt class schedules and affect research, but the area’s economy may suffer if there is prolonged interruption in operations. Site-specific reviews of each college and university asset are required to assess expected impacts.
  180 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 181

EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCES
BUILDINGS AND ECONOMY
RISK TO BUILDINGS
The Charles River neighborhoods
are generally less exposed than other Climate Ready Boston focus areas in the near term and throughout the mid- century. Nevertheless, without mitigation, impacts may still be expected, particularly for the lower-probability flood events later this century.
The Charles River neighborhoods are not expected to experience structure and content damage until mid-century. Even so, damages may be comparatively low when considering
CHARLES RIVER REAL ESTATE MARKET VALUE EXPOSED
impacts in other focus areas. As soon as the 2050s, approximately $13,000 in annualized structure
and content losses are expected under the low- probability (1 percent annual chance) event. Mid- century losses are expected to be concentrated along the Charles River Esplanade.
Structures exposed in the Charles River neighborhoods increase significantly from the 1 percent annual chance event (low probability) to the 0.1 percent annual chance event (very low probability) later in the century. Overall, nearly $15 million in annualized structure and contents losses could be expected as soon as the 2070s.
CHARLES RIVER BUILDING EXPOSURE
In the second half of the century, approximately 700 structures are expected to be exposed to the low-probability flood event (1 percent annual chance), with $4 million expected in annualized structure and contents losses. Most of these losses may be concentrated in Back Bay, with over 60 structures expected to be impacted in Allston and less than ten in Fenway. Very low-probability flood events (0.1 percent annual chance) expected as soon as the 2070s may present significant risk, with nearly 3,640 structures expected to be exposed. Considering all storm frequencies analyzed, nearly $15 million in annualized structure and contents losses are expected in the late century.
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
    182 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 183

RISK TO THE ECONOMY
The Charles River neighborhoods contribute over 237,000 jobs and $46 billion in annual output (sales and revenues) to the Boston economy. Top industries in terms of employment are hospitals, restaurants, and colleges, universities, and professional schools due to the presence of the Longwood Medical Area and large institutions. Hospitals, real estate, insurance, and financial investment activities are the area’s current top- producing industries when considering sales and revenues. In contrast to South Boston, many
of the area’s top industries are vulnerable
to business interruption, as it is extremely difficult for many large institutions to operate remotely or relocate operations quickly in the event of a coastal storm. Nevertheless, business interruption is not expected in the Charles River neighborhoods in the near-term, and mid-century business interruption is limited in comparison
to other focus areas, though not insubstantial. In the second half of the century, the Charles River neighborhoods can expect close to $90,000 in annualized output losses due to expected flood damage to structures.3 As soon as the 2070s, annualized output losses as a result of business interruption are expected to be around $6.3 million with approximately 40 annualized jobs lost. These estimates include interruption from businesses directly exposed to flood impacts,
as well as the reverberations that impact may have throughout Suffolk County’s economy.4 Industries expected to be most affected are the performing arts, restaurants, and entertainment and recreational facilities, likely due to the exposure at the Soldiers Field Athletic Area and other entertainment industries present along the Charles River.
CHARLES RIVER ECONOMIC LOSSES
 ECONOMIC RISK ASSUMPTIONS
Job and output loss includes direct, indirect, and induced consequences of flood impacts. Direct results are impacts felt within a neighborhood, while indirect and induced results are those expected to be felt throughout Suffolk County as a result
of changes in spending patterns. Results
for both job and output losses are the sum
of annualized values for the four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level
rise scenario. This represents a lower-bound estimate for several reasons. First, not all probabilistic events are considered. Second, the analysis assumes that all impacted businesses eventually reopen, though FEMA estimates that almost 40 percent of small businesses—and up to 25 percent of all businesses—never reopen after experiencing flood impacts. Third, only building areas directly impacted by floodwater are assumed to experience business interruption. This does not consider interruptions of businesses due to loss of power or utility functions. Finally, the analysis only considers existing populations, businesses, and buildings and does not include projections for future growth. Refer to the Appendix for a more detailed explanation of the exposure and consequence analysis.
   CHARLES RIVER ANNUALIZED LOSSES
  INDUSTRY
  ANNUALIZED LOSS OF ECONOMIC OUTPUT
  Performers and Performing Arts Companies
Restaurants
Real Estate
All other industries Total
$ 1,000,000 $ 630,000
$ 730,000 $ 2,900,000 $ 6,300,000
   Entertainment and Recreational Facilities, including sports centers, museums, and parks
 $ 940,000
      184 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 185
3Expected flood damages are calculated for the 10%, 2%, 1%, and 0.1% annual chance flood events only.
4Losses to particular industries are based on current development and economic activity in the area, and considering that South Boston is in a period of intense growth, may differ as development continues.

   EXPECTED ANNUALIZED LOSSES TO STRUCTURES AND CONTENTS
36 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE AT 10%, 2%, 1%, 0.1% ANNUAL CHANCE COASTAL FLOOD EVENTS.
  CHARLES RIVER ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
   186 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 187
Each circle represents annualized losses suffered by an individual building. Larger circle size indicates higher contents and structures losses. Annualized losses take into consideration the annual probability of an event occurring, as well as the projected impacts of such an event.
 Probable annualized losses are based on generalized assumptions, as opposed to site-specific assessment of structures. Site-specific evaluations of vulnerability are beyond the scope of this assessment and should be reserved for detailed evaluation of specific resilience initiatives or a next phase of this project.
 
CHARLES RIVER NEIGHBORHOODS
APPLICATION OF RESILIENCE INITIATIVES
  PROTECTED SHORES
PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT- SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
To reduce the risk of coastal flooding at major inundation points, the City should study the feasibility of constructing district-scale flood protection at the primary flood entry points for the Charles River neighborhoods (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below for a preliminary identification of locations and potential benefits). As described below, flood protection systems that would benefit these neighborhoods would likely be located by the New Charles River Dam, in South Boston, and in Dorchester.
These feasibility studies should feature engagement with local community stakeholders, coordination
with infrastructure adaptation, and considerations of how flood protection would impact or be impacted
by neighborhood character and growth. Examples of prioritization criteria include the timing of flood risk, consequences for people and the economy, social equity, financial feasibility, and potential for additional benefits beyond flood risk reduction.
POTENTIAL DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION LOCATIONS5
See District-Scale Flood Protection Systems section for a citywide perspective on district-scale flood protection. District-scale flood protection is only one piece of a multi- layered solution that includes prepared and connected communities, resilient infrastructure, and adapted buildings.
5 These preliminary coastal flood protection concepts are based on a high-level analysis of existing topography, rights-of-way, and urban and environmental conditions. Important additional factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions, zoning, as well as any potential external impacts as a result of the project have not been studied in detail. As described in Initiatives 5-2 and 5-3, detailed feasibility studies, including appropriate public and stakeholder engagement, are required in order to better understand the costs and benefits of flood protection in each location.
6 Additional flood protection may be required for flood events more severe than the 1% annual chance flood. See Appendix for more detailed information on expected effectiveness of flood protection systems, including analysis of additional flood protection locations and flood frequencies.
7 Benefits of district-scale flood protection would be modest.
8 While it is expected that flood protection that would not be independently effective would have some effect on flood loss, this effect could be positive or negative, and understanding the extent of the effect would require more detailed evaluation. As such, any benefits or costs above the identified level of protection (the point beyond which the flood protection measure can no longer maintain independent effectiveness) have not been evaluated.
  In the near term, coastal and riverine flood risk along the Charles River is modest and likely does not require district- scale flood protection.
Later in the century, combined flood protection at multiple locations will become critical:
◦ At the New Charles River Dam, addressing potential overtopping or flanking of the dam.
◦ At the South Boston Waterfront, addressing inland flood pathways originating from Fort Point Channel, Boston Harbor, and the Reserve Channel; and
◦ At Dorchester Bay, addressing inland flood pathways originating from the Old Harbor and Savin Hill Cove.
Dorchester Bay
LOCATIONS
◦ The New Charles River Dam location, described in the Charles River and Downtown focus areas (see pp. 174, 216), addresses potential overtopping or flanking of the dam.
◦ The South Boston Waterfront location, described in the South Boston focus area (see p.282), addresses flood entry points along the edge of the district.
◦ The Dorchester Bay location, described in the Dorchester focus area (see p.194), addresses flood pathways from the Old Harbor and Savin Hill Cove.
DETAILED CONSIDERATIONS
◦ Multiple neighborhoods protected:
The largest flood protection benefit for neighborhoods along the Charles River comes from protection at the New Charles River Dam. In addition, flood protection at the dam is expected to have near-term benefits for portions of Downtown and Charlestown.
◦ Need for multiple alignments late century: Flood protection at the dam alone will not protect against late-century flooding from Fort Point Channel, the Old Harbor, and Savin Hill Cove, for which interventions at the South Boston Waterfront and Dorchester Bay will
be needed.
 SLR SCENARIO
  DISTRICT SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD6
  9” SLR (2030s–2050s)
21” SLR (2050s–2100s)
36” SLR
(2070s or later)
None7
The New Charles River Dam
The New Charles River Dam, South Boston Waterfront, and Dorchester Bay Locations combined
     188 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 189
New Charles River Dam
South Boston Waterfront
 
PREPARED & CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
CONDUCT AN OUTREACH CAMPAIGN TO PRIVATE FACILITIES THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS TO SUPPORT PREPAREDNESS AND ADAPTATION
In the long term, the City should conduct outreach to managers of facilities in the Charles River neighborhoods that serve significant concentrations of vulnerable populations and are not required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans under current regulations. Targeted facilities should include affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment centers, daycare facilities, food pantries, small nonprofit offices, and others. The City should conduct outreach in the long term because there are no populations exposed under the 1 percent annual chance flood event until 36 inches of SLR, meaning that the Charles River neighborhoods has a longer adaptation window than other focus areas in the Boston. An illustrative example of the type of facilities to which the City could do outreach is the Bright Horizons Family Center, which will be exposed to damage later in the century.9
The City can reach out to small businesses in the Charles River neighborhoods exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term to help them develop business continuity plans, evaluate insurance coverage needs, and identify low-cost physical adaptations. The Charles River neighborhoods have roughly 160 commercial buildings exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term. In addition, the Brighton and the Allston Village Main Street Districts are expected to have isolated portions exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term and throughout the century. The Charles River neighborhoods do not have any small businesses exposed to coastal flooding during the 1 percent annual chance flood event with 9 inches of SLR.
9The City did not review the extent of existing preparedness planning as part of this study.
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
ESTABLISH INFRASTRUCTURE COORDINATION COMMITTEE
The Infrastructure Coordination Committee (ICC) should support coordinated adaptation planning for Charlestown’s
key infrastructure systems, including transportation, water and sewer, energy, telecommunications, and environmental assets. In the near term, the City should support the MBTA in conducting a full asset-level vulnerability assessment of its system. While the Charles River neighborhoods are not impacted by coastal and riverine flooding in the near term, flooding in Downtown Boston could reduce mobility for residents who depend on the Red, Green, and Orange Lines to access jobs and critical services in the area. In addition, in the later century under the 1 percent annual flood event, the Green Line will be exposed to coastal flooding, via the Arlington and Prudential Stations.
The Office of Emergency Management should work with the Boston Transportation Department, Department of Public Works, and private utilities to provide guidance on critical roads to prioritize for adaptation planning, including those that are part of the City’s evacuation network and are required to restore or maintain critical services. In particular, Storrow Drive will be exposed at 9 inches of SLR under the 1 percent annual chance flood event. Storrow Drive is an important cross-town route that runs along the Charles River Esplanade, becoming Soldiers Field Road to the west and David G. Mugar Way to the east.
The 2016 Boston Community Energy Study identified four sites in the Charles River neighborhoods as potential locations for emergency microgrids, based on their concentration of critical facilities. The Environment Department can work with local stakeholders and utility providers to explore these locations. Two of the sites, adjacent to Fenway Park and Northeastern University, are exposed to coastal and riverine flooding for very low-probability events (0.1 percent annual chance) expected later in the century, with minimal and isolated exposure to stormwater flooding in the near term.
  EXPAND BOSTON’S SMALL BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
PROVIDE GUIDANCE ON PRIORITY EVACUATION
AND SERVICE ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE ICC
  CONDUCT FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
 190 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 191

ADAPTED BUILDINGS
PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS FOR PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
Upon amending the zoning code to support climate readiness (see Initiative 9-2, p.135), the Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should immediately notify all developers with projects in the development pipeline in the future floodplain that they may alter their plans in a manner consistent with the zoning amendments (e.g., elevating their first-floor ceilings without violating building height limits), without needing to restart the BPDA permitting process. Currently, 121 residential and 45 commercial buildings are under construction or permitted in the Charles River neighborhoods, representing 4,511 additional housing units and 360,000 square feet of new commercial space.
The Boston Planning and Development Agency should incorporate future climate considerations (long-term projections for extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding) into major planning efforts in the Charles River neighborhoods.
ESTABLISH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS, SUPPORTED BY A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate risks and actions they can undertake
to address these risks. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost-effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements.
To address extreme heat risks, the Office of Budget Management should work with City departments to prioritize backup power installation at municipal facilities that demonstrate high levels of criticality, including Boston Centers for Youth and Family and Boston Public School facilities that serve as emergency shelters. An illustrative example of the type of facility that the City might prioritize to protect the power supply within the Charles River neighborhoods against heat impacts is the Jackson Mann Community Center.
  INCORPORATE FUTURE CLIMATE CONDITIONS INTO AREA PLANS AND ZONING AMENDMENTS
REPARE MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
  192 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 193

Dorchester
Dorchester is the largest neighborhood in Boston in terms of both population and geographic area. It is bounded by South Boston to the north, Dorchester Bay to the east, the Neponset River to the south, and Mattapan and Roxbury to the west.
Dorchester was founded in 1630 and remained
a predominately agricultural community for
200 years, although there was some waterfront industrial activity, especially in the Lower Mills area along the Neponset River and at Commercial Point. During the nineteenth century, Dorchester became a country retreat for wealthier Boston households, who built estates and second homes. In 1845, the Old Colony Railroad opened, with stations along Crescent Avenue (near the current JFK/U Mass Station), Savin Hill, and Harrison Square (near the current Fields Corner Station), thereby connecting Boston and Plymouth, Massachusetts. In 1870, Boston fully annexed Dorchester, and commercial and residential development accelerated. Supported by new
streetcar and municipal water service, Dorchester’s population increased from only 12,000 residents in 1870 to 150,000 by the 1920s.
From 1950 to 1980, Dorchester experienced disinvestment. In the 1950s, the Old Colony line was closed, and construction of the Southeast Expressway (I-93), which separated Dorchester’s residential areas to the west from the waterfront, was completed. In 1964, the Columbia Point public housing complex, which included approximately 1,500 low-income units, opened. By the 1980s, the complex was in such disrepair that it was turned over to a private firm for redevelopment. However, there was some modest institutional investment during this time period, with University of
Massachusetts Boston Harbor Campus opening on Columbia Point in 1974 and the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in 1979.
Today, Dorchester consists of a number of distinct residential neighborhoods, anchored by commercial districts, including Uphams Corner, Fields Corner, and Codman Square. Dorchester has benefitted from the recent expansion of the Fairmount Line, which runs from Downtown to Readville, with three new stations in Dorchester (Newmarket, Four Corners/Geneva Avenue, and Talbot Avenue). The City is planning transit-oriented development along the Fairmount Line. In addition, the University
of Massachusetts Boston is planning a significant expansion at Columbia Point on the former Bayside Exposition Center site.
  CC Image courtesy of dalecruse on Flickr
194 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 195

FLOOD PROGRESSION
In the second half of the century, large areas of Dorchester will be exposed
to high-probability flooding
(10 percent annual chance). During this time frame, coastal flooding in Dorchester will be most prominent from Dorchester Bay near Joseph Moakley Park and along the Neponset River.
9 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
Dorchester is exposed to climate change impacts including heat, increased precipitation and stormwater flooding, and sea level rise and coastal and riverine flooding. Exposure to heat and stormwater flooding are addressed in the Citywide Vulnerability Assessment (see p.12), while exposure and consequences to coastal and riverine flood risk are further discussed in this section
In the near term and in the second half of the century, exposure to coastal flooding is primarily due to the low waterfront edge along Dorchester
21 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
LEGEND
 DEFINITIONS
Near term: Beginning 2030s, assumes 9 inches of sea level rise
Midterm: Beginning 2050s, assumes 21 inches of sea level rise
Long term: Beginning 2070s or later, assumes 36 inches of sea level rise
Exposure: Can refer to people, buildings, infrastructure, and other resources within areas likely to experience hazard impacts. Does not consider conditions that may prevent or limit impacts.
Vulnerability: Refers to how and why people or assets can be affected by a hazard. Requires site-specific information.
Consequence: Illustrates to what extent people or assets can be expected to
be affected by a hazard, as a result of vulnerability and exposure. Consequences can often be communicated in terms of economic losses.
Annualized losses: The sum of the probability-weighted losses for all four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level rise scenario. Probability-weighted losses are the losses for a single event times the probability of that event occurring in a given year.
*For a full list of definitions, refer to the Glossary in the Appendix.
 36 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
196 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 197
       
 Bay and the Neponset River. Though exposure is largely limited in the near term, approximately
10 percent of the land areas in Dorchester have a high probability of flooding as soon as the 2050s (10 percent annual chance). Areas around Joseph Moakley Park are additionally exposed to low- probability flood events (1 percent annual chance) as soon as the 2050s.
In the late century, Dorchester exposure will change significantly, with large areas exposed to high-probability flood events (10 percent annual chance). More critically, in the late century, Northern Dorchester is expected to become a flood pathway to South Boston, the South End, and Roxbury. Areas around Joseph Moakley Park, created using fill in the late 1800s, tend to be low lying, leading to the exposure in Dorchester and surrounding areas.
The topography around Joseph Moakley Park and I-93 is low lying, potentially allowing floodwaters to propagate inland. Flood protection solutions targeted toward this area
in northern Dorchester may provide benefits in South Boston, the South End, and Roxbury.
The greatest concentration of land area exposed is on the northern end of Dorchester, due to coastal flooding from Dorchester Bay through Joseph Moakley Park.
In the late century, flooding from Dorchester Bay will extend from Dorchester into South Boston, the South End, and Roxbury.
198 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 199
  
EXPOSURE
POPULATION & INFRASTRUCTURE
POPULATION AND SOCIAL VULNERABILITIES
There are about 87,000 residents in Dorchester, about 14 percent of Boston’s overall population.
In total, 24 percent of Dorchester households
have children, compared to 17 percent citywide. Dorchester also has a diverse population that is 72 percent people of color, compared to 52 percent citywide.
Approximately 6,820 people live in housing that
is projected to be at risk in a low-probability flood scenario (1 percent annual chance) as soon as
the 2070s, generating need for shelter beds for an estimated 750 individuals. Seven public emergency
DORCHESTER POPULATION EXPOSURE
shelters are located within Dorchester and have the capacity for 1,000 individuals. McCormick Middle School, located on Columbia Point, is northern Dorchester’s only emergency shelter, and as soon as the 2050s, it will be exposed to low- probability flood events (1 percent annual chance). If this shelter is impacted by flooding, all roads leading out of Columbia Point are also expected
to be flooded, potentially isolating residents in the northern portion of Dorchester without shelter. As soon as the 2070s, the Leahy Holloran Community Center will also be exposed to high-probability flood events (10 percent annual chance), which would reduce the shelter capacity by an additional 140 individuals.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Damage to exposed roads and the MBTA Red Line could isolate Columbia Point from the rest of Dorchester and impact transportation connections to North Quincy.
Within this century, all of Dorchester’s evacuation routes, including I-93 South, Morrissey Boulevard, Neponset Avenue, and Gallivan Boulevard, will
be exposed to coastal flooding and sea level rise.
In the near term, portions of Morrissey Boulevard near the Dorchester Bay Basin and the Neponset Avenue/I-93 South junction are exposed to high- probability flood events (1 percent annual chance). As soon as the 2050s, all of Morrissey Boulevard,
as well as sections of I-93 South in the same area, will be exposed to high-probability flood events
(10 percent annual chance). Road closures due to flood damage could isolate Columbia Point from the rest of Dorchester, impacting a major university (University of Massachusetts Boston) and three
K–12 schools, affecting delivery of resources into the area, and affecting major transportation links between Downtown Boston, Dorchester, and the South Shore.
In the second half of the century, the MBTA Red Line JFK/UMass Station will be exposed
to high-probability flood events, meaning that approximately 8,000 riders may need alternative transportation options. In addition, portions
of the Fairmount commuter rail line in South Boston are exposed to high-probability storms, potentially limiting the transportation options
of those who commute from Dorchester to
South Boston or Downtown using this line. As soon as the 2070s, sections of the Fairmount
line in northern Dorchester and the Newmarket Station will be exposed to flooding. Low- to no-income populations that might depend disproportionally on public transportation may also be disproportionally affected by the impacts for coastal flooding and sea level rise in the mid- to late century.
Dorchester’s emergency response facilities are exposed to sea level rise and coastal flood impacts throughout the century.
Private ambulance service providers have two facilities located in the Dorchester neighborhood. In the near term, one facility is exposed to flood impacts due to high-probability storms (10
percent annual chance). As soon as the 2050s, it will be exposed to monthly tides. If the station is damaged or has reduced response capacity, then the remaining station may be expected to cover the service area. As soon as the 2070s, the remaining station will become exposed to flooding from low- probability events (1 percent annual chance).
In the near term, the Boston State Police Station H-6 will be exposed to low-probability storm events, while the Engine 20 Fire Station will be exposed to high-probability storm events (10 percent annual chance) as soon as the 2070s and may require support from other stations in the neighborhood.
Commercial Point is exposed to low- probability storms in the near term. This is not expected to disrupt distribution of liquid natural gas to and from National Grid’s storage tank.
Commercial Point, nested between Dorchester
Bay and the Neponset River, is home to a liquid natural gas (LNG) storage tank, solar panels, and a commercial marina. National Grid’s LNG storage tank on Commercial Point is elevated to provide protection against storm surge and is not expected to be exposed to flood impacts this century. Though other portions of Commercial Point and surface roads that connect the plant inland are exposed to flooding in the near term, National Grid has operational contingencies and plans in place to keep the natural gas plant operational. The solar power–generating facility on Commercial Point
is not expected to be exposed to coastal flooding during this century but may be at risk of wind damage during storm events.
  200 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 201

EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCES
BUILDINGS AND ECONOMY
RISK TO BUILDINGS
In the near term, close to 170 structures in Dorchester can expect some level of flooding from a low-probability event (1 percent annual chance) leading to $6 million in annualized direct physical damage costs to structures and their contents. Loss is expected to be concentrated most heavily in commercial (including office) and industrial uses. Exposure to high tide is also significant, with over 30 structures exposed in the near term (about $11 million in real estate market value).
As soon as the 2070s, close to 4,500 of Dorchester’s structures can expect some level of flooding
from a low-probability event resulting in direct physical damage costs of $86 million. Over half of all annualized losses expected in the late century are attributed to commercial and office buildings averaging three stories tall.
In addition, close to 120 structures (close to $200 million in real estate market value) are expected to be exposed to high tide later in the century. Also expected to be exposed to high tide later in the century is the former Bayside Exposition Center, where University of Massachusetts Boston has planned expansion and redevelopment.
Close to 4,500 structures can expect some level of flooding from a low-probability event in the late century.
C C I m a g e c o u r t e s y o f d a l e c
DORCHESTER BUILDING EXPOSURE
cr
r
u
us
s
e
e
o
on
n
F
Fl
li
ic
c
k
k
r
r
   DORCHESTER MARKET VALUE EXPOSURE
 202 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
   CC Image courtesy of docsearls on Flickr
Focus Areas 203

 Over $200 million in current real estate market value is expected to be exposed to high tides in the late century.
RISK TO THE ECONOMY1
Dorchester provides Boston with close to 35,000 jobs and over $7 billion in annual output. Top employers in the community include public education, hospitals, and grocers, though no one industry seems to dominate. The economy is heavily service oriented. As with other service- oriented neighborhood economies, restaurants are expected to be most heavily impacted in a flood event, particularly considering expected loss of employment. This is expected to be the case throughout the century. As soon as the 2070s, coastal flood impacts to Dorchester are expected to result in 110 annualized jobs lost and about $15 million in annualized output loss to the current Boston economy. Restaurants are expected to comprise roughly 40 percent of job loss and 20 percent of output loss. Restaurants tend to employ low- to moderate-income personnel, and business interruption to such assets can exacerbate impacts to already vulnerable populations.
1 Economic data is provided at the zip code level. One of the South Dorchester zip codes overlaps with Mattapan. As such, the base economic data, and thus annual jobs and output production, for South Dorchester includes some of Mattapan. This is expected to have minimal impact on calculated results, which are based on average output and employment by industry per square foot within neighborhood zip codes.
DORCHESTER ECONOMIC LOSSES
Direct physical damages to structures are expected to be heavily concentrated in commercial and office use buildings.
 ECONOMIC RISK ASSUMPTIONS
Job and output loss includes direct, indirect, and induced consequences of flood impacts. Direct results are impacts felt within a neighborhood, while indirect and induced results are those expected to be felt throughout Suffolk County as a result
of changes in spending patterns. Results
for both job and output losses are the sum
of annualized values for the four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level
rise scenario. This represents a lower-bound estimate for several reasons. First, not all probabilistic events are considered. Second, the analysis assumes that all impacted businesses eventually reopen, though FEMA estimates that almost 40 percent of small businesses—and up to 25 percent of all businesses—never reopen after experiencing flood impacts. Third, only building areas directly impacted by floodwater are assumed to experience business interruption. This does not consider interruptions of businesses due to loss of power or utility functions. Finally, the analysis only considers existing populations, businesses, and buildings and does not include projections for future growth. Refer to the Appendix for a more detailed explanation of the exposure and consequence analysis.
  DORCHESTER ANNUALIZED LOSSES
  INDUSTRY
  ANNUALIZED LOSS OF ECONOMIC OUTPUT
  Restaurants Real Estate
Wholesale trade and retail
All other industries
Total
$3,200,000 $1,400,00
$1,700,000
$7,900,000
$14,900,000
   Recreation facilities, including bowling centers, sports centers, and parks
 $790,000
      204 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 205

  EXPECTED ANNUALIZED LOSSES TO STRUCTURES AND CONTENTS
36 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE AT 10%, 2%, 1%, 0.1% ANNUAL CHANCE COASTAL FLOOD EVENTS.
   DORCHESTER ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
    206 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 207
Each circle represents annualized losses suffered by an individual building. Larger circle size indicates higher contents and structures losses. Annualized losses take into consideration the annual probability of an event occurring, as well as the projected impacts of such an event.
 Probable annualized losses are based on generalized assumptions, as opposed to site-specific assessment of structures. Site-specific evaluations of vulnerability are beyond the scope of this assessment and should be reserved for detailed evaluation of specific resilience initiatives or a next phase of this project.
 
DORCHESTER
APPLICATION OF RESILIENCE INITIATIVES
PROTECTED SHORES
DEVELOP LOCAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE PLANS TO SUPPORT DISTRICT-SCALE CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The City should develop a local climate resilience plan for Dorchester to support district-scale climate adaptation. The plan should include the following:
◦ Community engagement through a local climate resilience committee, leveraging existing local organizations and efforts.
◦ Land-use planning for future flood protection systems, including Flood Protection Overlay Districts in strategically important “flood breach points” identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Flood protection feasibility studies, evaluating district-scale flood protection, including at locations identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Infrastructure adaptation planning through the Infrastructure Coordination Committee. For Dorchester, key partners include the Department of Conservation and Recreation, which controls Morrissey Boulevard, and the Boston Parks and Recreation Department, which controls Joseph Moakley Park.
◦ Coordination with other plans, including Imagine Boston 2030, GoBoston 2030, Special Planning Areas, the Morrissey Boulevard redesign, the Joseph Moakley Park master plan, and any potential Municipal Harbor Plan process.
◦ Development of financing strategies and governance structures to support district-scale adaptation.
ESTABLISH FLOOD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS AND REQUIRE POTENTIAL INTEGRATION WITH FLOOD PROTECTION
The Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should petition the Boston Zoning Commission to create new Flood Protection Overlay Districts in areas that
are strategically important for potential future flood protection infrastructure (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below). Within a Flood Protection Overlay District, a developer would be required to submit a study of how a proposed project could be integrated into a future flood protection system; options may include raising and reinforcing the development site or providing room for a future easement across the site.
To reduce the risk of coastal flooding at major inundation points, the City should study the feasibility of constructing district-scale flood protection at the primary flood entry points in Dorchester (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below for a preliminary identification of locations and potential benefits).
These feasibility studies should take place in the context of local climate resilience plans, featuring engagement with local community stakeholders, coordination with infrastructure adaptation, and considerations of how flood protection would impact or be impacted by neighborhood character and growth. Examples of prioritization criteria include the timing of flood risk, consequences for
people and economy, social equity, financial feasibility, and potential for additional benefits beyond flood risk reduction.
  PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT- SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
 208 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 209

POTENTIAL DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION LOCATIONS2
See District-Scale Flood Protection Systems section for a citywide perspective on district-scale flood protection. District-scale flood protection is only one piece of a multi-layered solution that includes prepared and connected communities, resilient infrastructure, and adapted buildings.
In the near term, coastal flood risk Dorchester is limited to very low- probability, severe events and likely does not require district-scale flood protection.
As soon as the 2050s, combined flood protection at multiple locations will be critical:
◦ At Dorchester Bay, addressing inland flood pathways originating from the Old Harbor and Savin Hill Cove
◦ At the South Boston Waterfront, addressing inland flood pathways originating from Fort Point Channel, Boston Harbor, and the Reserve Channel
◦ At the New Charles River Dam, addressing potential overtopping or flanking of the dam
9” SLR (2030s–2050s)
21” SLR (2050s–2100s)
36” SLR
(2070s or later)
None4
The South Boston Waterfront and Dorchester Bay locations combined
The New Charles River Dam, South Boston Waterfront, and Dorchester Bay locations combined
LOCATIONS
◦ The Dorchester Bay location focuses on flood pathways along the Old Harbor and Savin Hill Cove. Potential flood protection solutions could include a landscaped berm or full elevation of Joseph Moakley Park, a waterside alignment along William Day Boulevard, an alignment along Harbor Point, a landscaped berm or alignment running along the waterfront through Old Harbor Park, and an alignment along Old Colony Avenue.
◦ The New Charles River Dam location, described in the Charles River and Downtown focus areas (see pp. 174, 216), addresses potential overtopping or flanking of the dam.
◦ The South Boston Waterfront location, described in the South Boston focus area (see p.282), addresses flood entry points along the edge of the district.
DETAILED CONSIDERATIONS
◦ Independently effective in the near term: Dorchester Bay flood protection is expected to be independently effective in protecting portions of Dorchester in the near term
until the 0.1 percent annual chance event. Nevertheless, impacts to Dorchester residents are modest in the near term, as the 1 percent annual chance event and higher probability events are not expected to affect residential buildings.
◦ Multiple protection locations required in
the second half of the century: Dorchester and areas in South Boston surrounding Joseph Moakley Park may be exposed to flooding from Fort Point Channel as soon as the 2050s. At this point, flood protection at
the South Boston Waterfront may be required to supplement flood protection at Dorchester Bay. The combination of flood protection at these two locations will benefit Dorchester, South Boston, Downtown, the South End, and even northern Roxbury. Later in the century, interventions at the New Charles River Dam will be required to protect the aforementioned neighborhoods against the 1 percent annual chance event.
 SLR SCENARIO
  DISTRICT SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD3
       210 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 211
2These preliminary coastal flood protection concepts are based on a high-level analysis of existing topography, rights-of-way, and urban and environmental conditions. Important additional factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions, and zoning as well
as any potential external impacts as a result of the project have not been studied
in detail. As described in Initiatives 5-2 and 5-3 (see pp. 106,110), detailed feasibility studies, including appropriate public and stakeholder engagement, are required in order to better understand the costs and benefits of flood protection in each location.
Additional flood protection may be required for flood events more severe than the
3
1% annual chance flood. See Appendix for more detailed information on expected
effectiveness of flood protection systems, including analysis of additional flood protection locations and flood frequencies.
4Benefits of district-scale flood protection would be modest.
 New Charles River Dam
South Boston Waterfront
 Dorchester Bay
 
PREPARED & CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
CONDUCT AN OUTREACH CAMPAIGN TO PRIVATE FACILITIES THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS TO ENSURE THAT THEY ENGAGE IN EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND ADAPTATION PLANNING.
EXPAND BOSTON’S SMALL BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
The City should conduct outreach to managers of facilities in Dorchester that serve significant concentrations of vulnerable populations and are not required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans under current regulations. Targeted facilities should include affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment centers, daycare facilities, food pantries, small nonprofit offices, and others. Illustrative examples of the types of facilities to which the City should conduct outreach are the Harbor Point mixed-income development and Columbia Point Infant Toddler Daycare. These facilities will be exposed to damage from mid-century sea level rise and coastal flooding, in addition to access issues related to stormwater flooding in the near term.5
The City should reach out to small businesses in Dorchester exposed to stormwater flooding risk in the near term or coastal flooding risk at 9 inches of SLR to help them develop business continuity plans, evaluate additional insurance coverage needs, and identify low- cost physical adaptations. In Dorchester, there are 34 commercial or mixed-use buildings that could host small businesses exposed to flooding under 1 percent annual chance flood event with 9 inches of SLR. Furthermore, three Main Street districts, Upham’s Corner, Bowdoin/ Geneva, and Field’s Corner, are expected to have isolated portions exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term and throughout the century.
5 The City did not review the extent of existing preparedness planning as part of this study.
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
ESTABLISH INFRASTRUCTURE COORDINATION COMMITTEE ADAPTATION PLANNING.
PROVIDE GUIDANCE ON PRIORITY EVACUATION
AND SERVICE ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE ICC
The Infrastructure Coordination Committee (ICC) should support coordinated adaptation planning for Dorchester’s key infrastructure systems, including transportation, water and sewer, energy, telecommunications, and environmental assets. In the near term, the City will support the MBTA in conducting a full asset-level vulnerability assessment of its system, including the Red Line. The JFK/UMass Red Line Station will be exposed under a 10 percent annual chance flood event with 21 inches of SLR.
The Office of Emergency Management should work
with Boston Transportation Department, Department of Public Works, and private utilities to provide guidance on critical roads to prioritize for adaptation planning, including evacuation routes and roads required to restore or maintain critical services. Under 9 inches of SLR, four evacuation routes are exposed under a 1 percent annual chance flood event. These evacuation routes include
I-93 South, Morrissey Boulevard, Neponset Avenue, and Gallivan Boulevard.
The 2016 Boston Community Energy Study identified five sites in Dorchester as feasible locations for emergency microgrids due to their concentration of critical facilities. These sites are the intersection of Gallivan Boulevard and Neponset Avenue, Fields Corner, Codman Square, Four Corners/Geneva, and along Blue Hill Avenue.
The Environment Department should work with local stakeholders and utility providers to explore this location. The proposed Gallivan Boulevard and Fields Corner sites are exposed to extensive stormwater flooding in the near term. The Gallivan Boulevard site also may be exposed to the 1 percent annual chance event as soon as the 2050s.
    CONDUCT FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
 212 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 213

ADAPTED BUILDINGS
PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS FOR PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
Upon amending the zoning code to support climate readiness (see Initiative 9-2, p.135), the Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should immediately notify all developers with projects in the development pipeline in the future floodplain that they may alter their plans in a manner consistent with the zoning amendments (e.g., elevating their first-floor ceilings without violating building height limits), without needing to restart the BPDA permitting process. Currently, 39 residential and 18 commercial buildings are under construction or permitted in Dorchester, representing 3,067 additional housing units and six million square feet of new commercial space.
The Office of Budget Management should work with City departments to prioritize upgrades to municipal facilities in Dorchester that demonstrate high levels of vulnerability (in terms of the timing and extent of exposure), consequences of partial or full failure, and criticality
(with highest priority for impacts on life and safety) from coastal flooding. Exposure to municipal facilities located in Dorchester is minimal in the near term. Later in the century, the McCormack Middle School, Paul A. Dever School, Boston Collegiate Middle School, and Engine 20 Fire Station will be exposed to flood impacts during the
1 percent annual chance event. To address extreme heat risks, the City should prioritize backup power installation at municipal facilities that demonstrate high levels of criticality, including specific Boston Centers for Youth and Family and Boston Public School facilities that serve as emergency shelters.
ESTABLISH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS, SUPPORTED BY A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate risk and actions they can undertake to address these risks. To prepare for the most immediate risks, the City should prioritize audits for buildings with at least a 1 percent annual chance of exposure to coastal and riverine flooding in the near term, under 9 inches
of sea level rise. In Dorchester, this includes almost 170 structures, 35 percent of which are exclusively residential and 24 percent of which are industrial. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost-effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements.
The City should incorporate future climate considerations (long-term projections for extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding) into major planning efforts in Dorchester. The City is conducting a planning process for Glover’s Corner and plans to update the Joseph Moakley Park master plan. The Department
of Conservation and Recreation is planning redesign and reconstruction of Morrissey Boulevard.
  PREPARE MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
 INCORPORATE FUTURE CLIMATE CONDITIONS INTO AREA PLANS AND ZONING AMENDMENTS
 214 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 215

Downtown
The Downtown focus
area comprises several neighborhoods that lie in the northern part of Boston, including the West End,
the North End, the Financial District, Chinatown, and
the Leather District.
The West End lies across the Charles River from Cambridge, between the Longfellow Bridge and the Charlestown Bridge. The North End sits at the northernmost corner of the Boston mainland, surrounded on two sides by the Boston Harbor, across from East Boston. Prior to the 2000s,
the North End was cut off from the rest of the mainland by the elevated Central Artery (I-93), placed underground during the “Big Dig.” The Financial District lies between the West End and North End and covers the largest extent of the focus area. Chinatown sits on the southern edge of Downtown, and the Leather District occupies nine blocks east of Chinatown.
Over the last three centuries, the Downtown focus area has been dramatically expanded through fill, as more land was needed to support population and industrial growth. The Downtown focus area was heavily impacted by urban renewal in the 1950s to 1970s, as evidenced by the construction of the Central Artery and clearing of sections of the West End.
Today, the Downtown focus area hosts a broad range of uses, reflecting the diverse neighborhoods that sit within it. The West End is currently in the
process of a development boom that is revitalizing the residential and commercial components of
the neighborhood. The neighborhood will look very different over the next ten years. In addition, this area has a strong institutional presence due
to Massachusetts General Hospital and affiliated facilities. The North End is a vibrant mixed-use neighborhood, with historic brick apartments intermingled with infill, and main commercial corridors along Hanover and Salem Streets. The Financial District is a commercial center, with
a number of high-rise buildings; a retail and recreational hub, with shopping at Downtown Crossing and the Theater District; and Government Center. Chinatown is a densely populated mixed- use district, with Tufts Medical Center located at
its southern edge. The Leather District contains residential and commercial tenants attracted to historic brick warehouses that offer “loft” space.
Reflecting its status as a center of commerce, government, and recreation, Downtown is home to extensive transportation infrastructure, a significant part of which is underground. This infrastructure is critical for residents of the entire region to access jobs and essential services. It is anchored by South Station and adjacent to Fort Point Channel and North Station.
Downtown is highly exposed to sea level rise
(SLR) impacts due to its extensive low-lying coastline, with multiple paths for inundation, and its exposure to flooding from the Charles River, Boston Harbor, and Fort Point Channel. Downtown is challenging for flood protection because activities on the waterfront are highly related to, and economically dependent on, direct visual and physical access to the waterfront.
216 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
   Image courtesy of Sasaki
Focus Areas 217

FLOOD PROGRESSION
Downtown is exposed to climate change impacts including heat, increased precipitation and stormwater flooding, sea level rise, and coastal
and riverine flooding. Exposure to heat and stormwater flooding are addressed in the Citywide Vulnerability Assessment, while exposure and consequences to coastal and riverine flood risk are further discussed in this section.
In the near term, low-lying waterfront areas between the Sumner Tunnel, which carries traffic across Boston Harbor from Route 1A in East Boston; the Financial District; and areas near the Charles River Dam
are most at risk. The lowest- lying areas are near the New England Aquarium and are exposed to high-probability storm events (10 percent annual chance) in the near term.
9 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
 DEFINITIONS
Near term: Beginning 2030s, assumes 9 inches of sea level rise
Midterm: Beginning 2050s, assumes 21 inches of sea level rise
Long term: Beginning 2070s or later, assumes 36 inches of sea level rise
Exposure: Can refer to people, buildings, infrastructure, and other resources within areas likely to experience hazard impacts. Does not consider conditions that may prevent or limit impacts.
Vulnerability: Refers to how and why people or assets can be affected by a hazard. Requires site-specific information.
Consequence: Illustrates to what extent people or assets can be expected to
be affected by a hazard, as a result of vulnerability and exposure. Consequences can often be communicated in terms of economic losses.
Annualized losses: The sum of the probability-weighted losses for all four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level rise scenario. Probability-weighted losses are the losses for a single event times the probability of that event occurring in a given year.
*For a full list of definitions, refer to the Glossary in the Appendix.
LEGEND
   21 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
 218 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
36 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
Focus Areas 219
  
 Much of the Downtown waterfront will be exposed to coastal flooding by the end
of the century. High tides are expected to impact inland areas near Faneuil Hall and
the New England Aquarium.
In addition, other parts of the waterfront that are out of the
1 percent annual chance floodplain earlier in the century are expected to be at risk by the end of the century.
Though Downtown’s total
land area at risk from coastal and riverine flooding is small compared to some focus areas, the land areas that are exposed are densely developed, likely leading to significant impacts in terms of structural damage and economic losses.
The topography of the Downtown focus area is shaped both by natural landforms and areas that were filled in the early and mid-1800s. The North End, for example, is largely naturally occurring high ground. On the other hand, the Mill Pond area, at the northern edge of the West End, was filled in the early 1800s, while the fill areas east and south of the North End were separately filled in the early to mid-1800s. These fill areas generally make
up the lowest lying and most vulnerable areas to coastal and riverine flooding within Downtown.
In the near term, low-lying waterfront areas near the Charles River Dam and the New England Aquarium are the source of the most significant flood risk Downtown. The land near the aquarium is the lowest-lying in all of Downtown, leading to the greatest exposure to high-probability coastal floods in the near term. Expected exposure to the 10 percent annual chance storm events in the near term extends as far inland as Faneuil Hall.
In the second half of the century, large areas near the aquarium and Faneuil Hall are expected to be exposed to flooding under high-probability storm events. In addition, the floodplain is expected
to expand toward the West End and along the waterfront edge between the Sumner Tunnel and Charles River Dam.
Areas exposed to flooding only under low- probability events (1 percent annual chance
or greater) in the near term are expected to be exposed to flooding during monthly high tides later in the century. This includes the aquarium and Faneuil Hall. Furthermore, most waterfront edges will be exposed to high-probability storm events (10 percent annual chance) by the end of the century, exposing densely developed areas during relatively frequently occurring storms.
Waterfront areas near the Charles River Dam and the New England Aquarium require resilience planning in the near term. Sections of the North End and Financial District require planning to mitigate loss before the end of the century.
220 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 221
  
EXPOSURE
POPULATION & INFRASTRUCTURE
POPULATION AND SOCIAL VULNERABILITY
Residents of Downtown comprise about 5 percent of Boston’s overall population, or about 30,000 people. Compared to the citywide average, Downtown has a smaller share of children, adults with low to no income, people with disability, and people of color, although one-third of the Downtown population still consists of people
of color. The population has a larger share of older adults and a significantly larger share
of renters and people without vehicles, as is typical of a downtown area. For this reason, the population residing within this area could be disproportionately affected by any disruptions
DOWNTOWN POPULATION EXPOSURE
in public transportation service, as well as loss of electricity and other utilities, particularly during summer or winter months, when climate regulation indoors is necessary for resident well-being.
In the near term, 630 people are expected to
be exposed to flooding during monthly high
tide, the highest of any focus area. In addition, approximately 2,190 people live in areas expected to be flooded by a high-probability flood event
(10 percent annual chance), and 4,680 people live
in areas expected to be flooded by a low-probability flood event (1 percent annual chance), making Downtown the second-most-exposed focus area
(in terms of people) after East Boston for these events in the near term. The Austonia Public Housing development, with approximately 100 units for the elderly, is expected to be exposed to near-term, low-probability flood events (1 percent annual chance event) and more frequent storms throughout the century.
Throughout the mid- to late century, for both
high- and low-probability events, Downtown
can consistently expect to have the second- or third-highest population affected by flooding of any Boston focus area, behind East Boston and South End, depending upon the coastal storm condition and sea level rise scenario. Later in the century, Downtown shelter needs are expected
to be around 1,000 individuals under the low- probability flood event (1 percent annual chance event). Since there are no emergency shelters located Downtown, those needing shelter will have to travel to other neighborhoods. This is especially critical for Downtown’s concentrations of older people and those without vehicles. The Charles
River neighborhoods, the South End, East Boston, and South Boston may have viable sheltering options for Downtown residents, though these neighborhoods are all expected to require more shelter space for their populations, and there may be access challenges associated with reaching them.1
INFRASTRUCTURE
Various transportation connections from Downtown to Charlestown, East Boston, and South Boston across waterways may be exposed to flood impacts at some time this century.
Tunnels and bridges that lead out of Downtown may be exposed to near-term sea level rise and coastal storms, particularly the I-93 North corridor that connects Downtown and Charlestown. Other evacuation route tunnels and bridges expected
to be exposed in the near term include the North Washington Bridge entrance next to Lovejoy Wharf that connects the North End and Charlestown, I-90/Ted Williams Tunnel entrances near Fort
Point Channel (Seaport District exposure in the near term may impact bridge travel), and Sumner/ Callahan Tunnel entrances in the northern end of Downtown. Two stormwater pumps that protect the I-90 portals are also exposed to mid-century flooding from low-probability storm events (1 percent annual chance), although site-specific evaluations should be conducted to assess true vulnerability and consequences of impact.
Two of the three MBTA stations that support connectivity from Downtown to East Boston and
1 Vehicle ownership is not a factor considered in shelter-need calculations and, as such, the estimate may be conservatively low. A resident without a personal vehicle may find it more difficult to evacuate and find access to a shelter than a resident with a personal vehicle.
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
  222 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 223

Charlestown may be exposed to flooding from sea level rise and coastal storms within this century. In particular, the Blue Line’s Aquarium Station may be exposed to high-probability flood events (10 percent annual chance) in the near term. If the Downtown Aquarium Station and East Boston’s exposed MBTA stations lose service due to flood impacts, Blue Line service could be interrupted from Downtown through Revere. This situation could lead to approximately 18,500 riders in need of alternative transportation options, leading to strains on other public transportation systems
and affecting traffic patterns on a large scale. In addition, late-century storms and sea level rise may also impact Orange Line service between Charlestown and Downtown. The two stations (Community College and North Station) that connect these neighborhoods are exposed to the low-probability flood event (1 percent annual chance). North Station is a major hub for Amtrak and MTBA, and exposure to low-probability flood events and sea level rise in the late century may cause large scale impacts to transportation systems in Downtown, Charlestown, and East Boston.
MBTA’s Red Line also services the Downtown area and connects Cambridge to South Boston. Portions of the Red Line that run through Downtown remain largely unexposed to flood impacts until later in the century; sections of the line proximate to the Charles River and the Charles/MGH Stations are exposed to the 1 percent chance event.
Planned expansion of MBTA’s South Station must consider effects of sea level rise and coastal storm flooding while choosing the location of a train yard.
The South Station Intermodal Transportation Center is expected to be exposed to low-probability coastal and riverine flooding later in the century. Redevelopment of the station and location of a new train yard must consider sea level rise and coastal flood impacts to ensure that investments are protected in the long term. One-third of Downtown’s emergency response services may be exposed to late- century flood impacts.
In the near term, State Police Station H-4, which has within its jurisdiction the Museum of Science, the Esplanade and Hatch Shell, and some of Boston’s major hospitals,2 is expected to be exposed to monthly high tides. While site-specific review is required to assess vulnerabilities to sea level rise, access interruption can be expected at the least.
In addition, one of the three EMS stations located Downtown may experience exposure to low- probability (1 percent annual chance) storm events in the near term.
In the second half of the century, one of two Boston Fire Department facilities located Downtown may be exposed to low-probability storm events. Both facilities are exposed to high-probability storm events later in the century (10 percent annual chance). Exposure of emergency services such as fire, police, and medical may hinder Downtown’s internal emergency-response capacity.
In addition, in the second half of the century, the Suffolk County Jail could be exposed to low-probability storm events. The facility has 650 beds. Evacuation and relocation of inmates in the case of a forecasted coastal storm could result in overcrowding at other facilities. Site-
specific evaluation of this facility is necessary to understand vulnerabilities and consequences of impacts.
Heating and cooling of Downtown office buildings may be compromised by low- probability mid-century storms and sea level rise. Low-probability late-century storms are expected to render Boston’s steam system inoperable.3
The Veolia Kneeland Street steam plant provides Downtown office buildings with heat and hot water in the winter and air conditioning and cold water in warmer months. If substantial flooding is experienced at the facility in the near term, it may be rendered inoperable. Steam will then have to be exported from the Kendall Station in Cambridge and the Scotia plant in Fenway/Kenmore, reducing Boston’s steam capacity by at least 50 percent. Though the distribution system is expected to return to normal operation shortly after flood levels recede, customers within the flood extent will likely experience temporary curtailments
or isolations in their steam supply, in addition
to select customers south of Kneeland Street, Northwest Boston, Quincy Market area, and Long Wharf area. Late-century flooding at Kneeland, Kendall, and Scotia Stations are expected to result in system failure, which will not be normalized until steam supply points can be repaired.
Loss of heating and cooling services in Downtown commercial buildings could potentially affect work productivity. Employees that work in facilities without heat capabilities may choose to stay
home on extremely cold days. Alternatively, air conditioning is often necessary to keep computer systems, data centers, and other electrical
equipment cool. Loss of air conditioning may cause such assets to overheat and shut down, resulting in lost work productivity. Loss of heating and cooling capacity across the city could have detrimental impacts to residents, particularly if storm events coincide with heat waves or cold weather.
Tufts Medical Center campus, including the Floating Hospital, Dental Center, and Rehabilitation Center, could be exposed to low-probability mid-century coastal storms.
Portions of the Tufts campus may be exposed
to the low-probability (1 percent annual chance) storm event in the second half of the century.4 The frequency of Tuft’s exposure to coastal storms can
be expected to increase with sea level rise and could potentially affect the facility’s emergency center. Any full or partial service interruption at Tufts will likely have an effect on Massachusetts General Hospital, also located Downtown. Though Massachusetts General Hospital is not likely to be exposed to flood impacts during this century, potential overcrowding at the facility can lead to swift resource depletion and a delay in necessary emergency care post-event.
4Source: “Station H-4, SP Boston.” The Massachusetts Executive Office of Public Safety and Security. http://www.mass.gov/eopss/law-enforce-and-cj/law- enforce/msp-troops/troop-h/station-h-4-sp-boston.html.
3Flood impacts are based on existing conditions of Veolia facilities. Near-term flood impacts may be managed through the potential upcoming replacement of Kneeland Station.
4Site-specific review of Tufts Medical Center assets is necessary.
224 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 225

EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCES
BUILDINGS AND ECONOMY
RISK TO BUILDINGS
In the near term, Downtown is expected to have approximately 60 structures exposed to flooding during monthly high tides—the largest number of exposed structures, ahead of Charlestown and East Boston. Downtown has more than double the current real estate market value exposed to monthly high-tide flooding compared to any other focus area in Boston. However, Downtown’s near-term high-tide exposure is concentrated in
a relatively small area—17 acres, compared to 90 acres in Dorchester. Mixed-use and residential uses together account for approximately 70 percent of the real estate market value exposed.
Additionally, low-probability coastal flood events in the near term lead to an exposed market value in Downtown that is roughly half of that for
Expected annualized losses
for Downtown make up about one-third of all those expected citywide in the near term and over 20 percent of all expected citywide losses toward the end of the century.
South Boston for the same event. Downtown has 390 structures exposed to flooding during a low- probability flood event (1 percent annual chance), behind only East Boston and South Boston.
In the late century, Downtown is expected to have 300 structures exposed during monthly high tides, five times as many as in the near term, and 1,240 structures exposed to flooding during a low- probability flood event (1 percent annual chance), more than 35 times as many as in the near term. Roughly 25 percent of the structures exposed to the 1 percent annual chance event are commercial, roughly 35 percent are mixed-use, and roughly
30 percent are residential. Land acreage exposed in Downtown is relatively low when compared
to other high-exposure neighborhoods under
all flood scenarios. For example, the Downtown land area exposed to high-tide flooding late in the century is roughly 20 percent of acres exposed
in South Boston and only 15 percent the exposed area in East Boston. This speaks to the high concentration of structures in Downtown Boston. A detailed evaluation would need to be conducted to determine whether waterfront shoreline protections or building-level adaptations would have a greater effect on reducing loss in this area over the near and long term.
DOWNTOWN BUILDING EXPOSURE
   DOWNTOWN MARKET VALUE EXPOSURE
 226 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 227

 RISK TO THE ECONOMY
As of 2014, there are over 12,200 jobs in Charlestown, and associated industries contribute over $2.5 billion of output (sales and revenues) into the city’s economy annually. The Charlestown economy is well balanced, as no single industry comprises more than an 8 percent share of employment or output within the neighborhood.
Charlestown’s economy is most vulnerable in medium- and long-term climate scenarios. Based on the neighborhood’s current economy and building stock conditions, $8 million in annualized output loss and approximately 50 positions in annualized employment loss are expected toward the end of the century. Scientific research and development, accounting, and insurance-related services rank among top industries expected to
be impacted. Losses have been calculated strictly based on expected flooding to structures, as opposed to egress and utility lines, and cascading loss of function impacts are not considered in the analysis.6 In the second half of the century, the site of a current martial arts training center is expected to be heavily impacted by floodwaters and joins top industries expected to be affected by coastal storm events.
6More-detailed analysis would be required to quantify expected loss of function impacts to utilities and transportation outside of economic loss derived from direct physical damage to structures.
DOWNTOWN ECONOMIC LOSSES
Over $700 million in current real estate market value is exposed to high-tide flooding in the near term, the highest amount of any neighborhood.
Projected losses Downtown
are concentrated in a smaller area than other neighborhoods expected to experience comparable direct damage impacts through the century.
Restaurant and retail industries will be particularly hard hit by flood impacts due to inherent impediments to temporary relocation for such businesses, as well as their roles in supporting the area. As these industries are known to support low- to moderate-income employees, special planning considerations will be needed to mitigate loss to vulnerable populations.
 ECONOMIC RISK ASSUMPTIONS
Job and output loss include direct, indirect, and induced consequences of flood impacts. Direct results are impacts felt within a neighborhood, while indirect and induced results are those expected to be felt throughout Suffolk County as a result
of changes in spending patterns. Results
for both job and output losses are the sum
of annualized values for the four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level
rise scenario. This represents a lower-bound estimate for several reasons. First, not all probabilistic events are considered. Second, the analysis assumes that all impacted businesses eventually reopen, though FEMA estimates that almost 40 percent of small businesses—and up to 25 percent of all businesses—never reopen after experiencing flood impacts. Third, only building areas directly impacted by floodwater are assumed to experience business interruption. This does not consider interruptions of businesses due to loss of power or utility functions. Finally, the analysis only considers existing populations, businesses, and buildings and does not include projections for future growth. Refer to the Appendix for a more detailed explanation of the exposure and consequence analysis.
  DOWNTOWN ANNUALIZED LOSSES
  INDUSTRY
  ANNUALIZED LOSS OF ECONOMIC OUTPUT
  Restaurants
Hospitals and Other Medical Services
Retail
Real Estate
All Other Industries Total
$15,400,000 $8,600,000
$4,200,000
$5,200,000 $34,900,000 $68,300,000
            228 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 229

  EXPECTED ANNUALIZED LOSSES TO STRUCTURES AND CONTENTS
36 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE AT 10%, 2%, 1%, 0.1% ANNUAL CHANCE COASTAL FLOOD EVENTS.
   DOWNTOWN ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
   230 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 231
Each circle represents annualized losses suffered by an individual building. Larger circle size indicates higher contents and structures losses. Annualized losses take into consideration the annual probability of an event occurring, as well as the projected impacts of such an event.
 Probable annualized losses are based on generalized assumptions, as opposed to site-specific assessment of structures. Site-specific evaluations of vulnerability are beyond the scope of this assessment and should be reserved for detailed evaluation of specific resilience initiatives or a next phase of this project.
 
DOWNTOWN
APPLICATION OF RESILIENCE INITIATIVES
PROTECTED SHORES
DEVELOP LOCAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE PLANS TO SUPPORT DISTRICT-SCALE CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The City should develop a local climate resilience plan for Downtown to support district-scale climate adaptation. The plan should include the following:
◦ Community engagement through a local climate resilience committee, leveraging existing local organizations and efforts.
◦ Land-use planning for future flood protection systems, including Flood Protection Overlay Districts in strategically important “flood breach points” identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Flood protection feasibility studies, evaluating district-scale flood protection, including at locations identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Infrastructure adaptation planning through
the Infrastructure Coordination Committee. For Downtown, the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation is a key partner, as it controls the New Charles River Dam.
◦ Coordination with other plans, including Imagine Boston 2030, GoBoston 2030, Special Planning Areas, the Downtown Waterfront Municipal Harbor Plan, and any future Municipal Harbor Plan processes.
◦ Development of financing strategies and governance structures to support district-scale adaptation.
ESTABLISH FLOOD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS AND REQUIRE POTENTIAL INTEGRATION WITH FLOOD PROTECTION
The Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should petition the Boston Zoning Commission to create new Flood Protection Overlay Districts in areas that
are strategically important for potential future flood protection infrastructure (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below). Within a Flood Protection Overlay District, a developer would be required to submit a study of how a proposed project could be integrated into a future flood protection system; options may include raising and reinforcing the development site or providing room for a future easement across the site.
To reduce the risk of coastal flooding at major inundation points, the City should study the feasibility of constructing district-scale flood protection at the primary flood
entry points Downtown (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below for a preliminary identification of locations and potential benefits).
These feasibility studies should take place in the context of local climate resilience plans, featuring engagement with local community stakeholders, coordination with infrastructure adaptation, and considerations of how flood protection would impact or be impacted by neighborhood character and growth. Examples of prioritization criteria include the timing of flood risk, consequences for people and the economy, social equity, financial feasibility,
and potential for additional benefits beyond flood risk reduction.
  PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT- SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
 232 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 233

  SLR SCENARIO
  DISTRICT SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD7
   POTENTIAL DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION LOCATIONS6
See District-Scale Flood Protection Systems Overview section (page Y) for a citywide perspective on district-scale flood protection. District-scale flood protection is only one piece of a multilayered solution that includes prepared and connected communities, resilient infrastructure, and adapted buildings.
In the near term, flood protection at two locations is critical:
◦ The Downtown Waterfront, addressing flood entry points along the low-lying eastern edge of Downtown; and
◦ The New Charles River Dam, addressing potential overtopping or flanking of the dam, which would inundate areas around North Station and the West End.
While flood protection at the waterfront would stay independently effective through the end of the century, protection at the dam would eventually need to be combined with interventions addressing flood risk from South Boston and Dorchester Bay in order to provide flood risk reduction to Boston’s interior neighborhoods.
◦ The Downtown Waterfront Location is focused on flood entry points along the low- lying eastern edge of Downtown, starting in the North End and extending to the mouth of Fort Point Channel. Flood protection solutions could include a series of barriers, potentially encompassing floodwalls, greenways, or berms. Potential alignments include along
the path of the Rose Kennedy Greenway, connecting high ground near Hanover Street in the north with high ground near Oliver Street in the south, or closer to the waterfront, with potential integration with Christopher Columbus Park.
◦ The New Charles River Dam Location, also described in the Charlestown focus area, is focused on flood pathways by the Zakim Bridge / New Charles River Dam, which would inundate the northern section of Downtown. Potential flood protection solutions could
6These preliminary coastal flood protection concepts are based on a high-level analysis of existing topography, rights-of-way, and urban and environmental conditions. Important additional factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions, and zoning, as well as any potential external impacts as a result of the project have not been studied in detail. As described in Initiatives 5-2 and 5-3, detailed feasibility studies, including appropriate public and stakeholder engagement, are required in order to better understand the costs and benefits of flood protection in each location.
7Additional flood protection may be required for flood events more severe than the 1 percent annual chance flood. See Appendix for more detailed information on expected effectiveness of flood protection systems, including analysis of additional flood protection locations and flood frequencies.
include a tide barrier across the mouth of Miller’s River, a tide gate and connecting flood protection system just west of Littoral Way, or a deployable barrier across the railroad right- of-way connecting Charlestown and North Station.
◦ The South Boston Waterfront Location, described in the South Boston focus area,
is focused on flooding from Fort Point Channel that would affect the southern areas of Downtown such as Chinatown and the Leather District.
◦ The Dorchester Bay Location, described in the Dorchester focus area, is focused on flooding from Dorchester Bay, which could reach parts of Downtown if not addressed.
DETAILED CONSIDERATIONS
◦ Independent protection at the Downtown Waterfront location throughout the century: The flood pathway around the Downtown Waterfront location is relatively isolated
from other flood pathways, so no additional alignments are necessary to protect this area.
◦ Large number of waterfront commercial buildings protected at the Downtown Waterfront location: The majority of buildings protected by flood protection at this location are commercial buildings.
◦ Many neighborhoods benefit from dam flood protection: Flood protection at the New Charles River Dam could simultaneously protect parts of northern Downtown, southern Downtown, Charlestown, the Charles River neighborhoods, and the South End and Roxbury.
◦ Requirement for multiple protection locations in the late century: Though flood protection at the New Charles River Dam
is expected to be able to protect northern sections of Downtown throughout the century, additional interventions at the South Boston Waterfront and Dorchester Bay are necessary to protect southern portions of Downtown,
the South End, South Boston, and portions of Roxbury and Dorchester from flooding later in the century.
234 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 235
9” SLR (2030s–2050s)
21” SLR (2050s–2100s)
LOCATIONS
Downtown Waterfront and the New Charles River Dam
Downtown Waterfront and the New Charles River Dam
Downtown Waterfront
New Charles River Dam
   Dorchester Bay
South Boston Waterfront
   36” SLR
(2070s or later)
 Downtown Waterfront, the New Charles River Dam, South Boston Waterfront, and Dorchester Bay locations combined

 PREPARED & CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
CONDUCT AN OUTREACH CAMPAIGN TO PRIVATE FACILITIES THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS TO ENSURE THAT THEY ENGAGE IN EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND ADAPTATION PLANNING
EXPAND BOSTON’S SMALL BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
The City should conduct outreach to managers of facilities in Downtown that serve significant concentrations of vulnerable populations and are not required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans under current regulations. Targeted facilities will include affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation centers, daycare facilities, food pantries, small nonprofit offices, and others. The City should
also conduct outreach to hotel and tourism attraction operators, given the role that they play in serving transient populations. An illustrative example of the type of facilities to which the City might conduct outreach is the
8
Kinder Care Learning Center. This facility is exposed to
near-term damage from sea level rise and coastal flooding, in addition to access issues related to near-term stormwater flooding.
The City should reach out to small businesses in Downtown exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term or coastal flooding under a 1 percent annual chance event at 9 inches of SLR to help them develop business continuity plans, evaluate insurance coverage needs, and identify low-cost physical adaptations. Under a 1 percent annual chance event at 9 inches of SLR, 185 commercial buildings and 131 mixed-use buildings that could host small businesses are exposed to flood risk. Furthermore, the Chinatown Main Street District is expected to have isolated portions exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term and throughout the century. The Chinatown Main Street District also will be significantly exposed to coastal flood impacts by low-probability storms in the mid- century.
8The City did not review the extent of existing preparedness planning as part of this study.
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
ESTABLISH INFRASTRUCTURE COORDINATION COMMITTEE
PROVIDE GUIDANCE ON PRIORITY EVACUATION
AND SERVICE ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE ICC
CONDUCT FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
The Infrastructure Coordination Committee (ICC) should support coordinated adaptation planning for Downtown’s
key infrastructure systems, including energy, transportation, water and sewer, and environmental assets. The City should support the MBTA in conducting a full asset-level vulnerability assessment of its system, including the Red Line. The MBTA is currently conducting a vulnerability assessment of the Blue Line. The Blue Line Aquarium Station will be exposed to flooding at 9 inches of SLR under a 1 percent annual chance event.
The Office of Emergency Management should work with Boston Transportation Department, Department of Public Works, and private utilities to provide guidance on critical roads to prioritize for adaptation planning, including evacuation routes and roads required to restore or maintain critical services. With 9 inches of SLR, under a 1 percent annual chance flood event, Interstate 93, Atlantic Avenue, Summer Street, Congress Street, and Nashua Street are exposed to coastal flooding.
The 2016 Boston Community Energy Study identified the North End as a potential location for an emergency microgrid, based on its concentration of critical facilities. The Environment Department should work with local stakeholders and utility providers to evaluate this site. The proposed location is expected to remain largely unexposed to both coastal and stormwater flooding throughout the century.
    236 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 237

ADAPTED BUILDINGS
PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS FOR PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
Upon amending the Zoning Code to support climate readiness (see Initiative 9-2), the Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should immediately notify all developers with projects in the development pipeline in the future floodplain that they may alter their plans
in a manner consistent with the zoning amendments
(e.g., elevating their first-floor ceilings without violating building height limits), without needing to restart the BPDA permitting process. Currently, 39 residential and 18 commercial buildings are under construction or permitted Downtown, representing 3,067 additional housing units and six million square feet of new commercial space.
The Boston Planning and Development Agency should incorporate future climate considerations (long-term projections for extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding) into major planning
efforts in Downtown. The City is currently drafting the Downtown Waterfront Municipal Harbor Plan. In addition, the State Department of Conservation and Recreation is evaluating options for Storrow Drive Tunnel repair or reconstruction.
ESTABLISH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS, SUPPORTED BY A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate risks and actions they can undertake to address these risks. To address the most immediate risks, the City should prioritize audits for buildings with at least a 1 percent annual chance of exposure to coastal and riverine flooding in the near
term, under 9 inches of SLR. Downtown, this includes almost 400 structures, with 42 percent of these consisting of residential and mixed-use buildings that house residents. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost- effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as installing backflow preventers, elevating critical equipment, and obtaining deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based, and subsidized elements.
The Office of Budget Management should work with City departments to prioritize upgrades to municipal buildings
in Downtown exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term or to flooding at 9 inches of SLR under a 1 percent annual chance flood event. EMS Station Ambulance 8 will
be exposed to coastal flooding at 9 inches of SLR under a 1 percent annual chance flood event. The South Postal Station on Atlantic Avenue will be exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term and coastal flooding from the 1 percent annual chance event in the second half of the century. To address extreme heat risks, the City should prioritize backup power installation at municipal facilities that demonstrate high levels of criticality, including specific Boston Centers for Youth
and Family and Boston Public School facilities that serve as emergency shelters.
  INCORPORATE FUTURE CLIMATE CONDITIONS INTO AREA PLANS AND ZONING AMENDMENTS
 PREPARE MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
 238 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 239

East Boston
East Boston, located to
the northeast, across from Charlestown and Downtown Boston, is bounded by tidal portions of Chelsea Creek, the Mystic River, and Boston Harbor.
East Boston is composed of five separate islands connected by fill. The first two islands, Noddle’s and Hog’s Islands, were joined during the eighteenth century, and the others, Governor’s, Bird, and Apple, were connected during the 1940s to support the growth of Logan Airport. In 1833, William Sumner established the East Boston Company to develop East Boston as a planned community. East Boston was annexed by Boston
in 1836. From 1840 onward, it experienced rapid growth, fueled by marine industrial activity along the waterfront, particularly the construction of clipper ships. Logan Airport was built in the early 1920s and has experienced significant expansion over time, especially during the 1960s and 1970s.
Today, East Boston is home to a mix of residential neighborhoods, commercial areas, and major regional transportation assets, including Logan Airport. East Boston is bisected by Route 1A/ McClellan Highway and Interstate 90 and has four major tunnels. The Sumner and Callahan Tunnels carry Route 1A under Boston Harbor, connecting Downtown and East Boston, with the Callahan carrying northbound traffic and the Sumner carrying southbound traffic. The Ted Williams Tunnel carries I-90 under Boston Harbor,
connecting South Boston to Logan Airport and providing a route for the Silver Line. The East Boston Tunnel carries the Blue Line from the Aquarium MBTA Station in Downtown to the Maverick Station in East Boston.
East Boston includes four major commercial areas, including Maverick Square to the south, Central Square at the edge of the Inner Harbor, Day Square near the Chelsea Street Bridge, and Orient Heights to the north. In addition, East Boston includes some industrial areas along the waterfront, particularly Chelsea Creek. The community also includes important recreational and natural areas, including the East Boston Greenway, Constitution Beach, and Belle Isle Marsh, the largest remaining salt marsh in Boston.
East Boston is currently a neighborhood in transition, as demonstrated by strong recent income growth and development activity. It has experienced an influx of young professionals, especially in Maverick Square, along Jeffries
Point, and along the Eagle Hill waterfront. The waterfront has been evolving into a mixed-use environment, with new residential and open-
space development. Since 2000, almost 300 new residential units have been built, with over 2,000 more either under construction or in the pipeline. The greatest concentration of new development has been along the waterfront, south of Central Square. Logan Airport also has experienced a significant expansion of international flights.
  Image courtesy of Sasaki
240 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 241

FLOOD PROGRESSION
East Boston is exposed to climate change impacts including heat, increased precipitation and stormwater flooding, and sea level rise and coastal and riverine flooding. Exposure to heat and stormwater flooding are addressed in the Citywide Vulnerability Assessment (see p.12), while exposure to and consequences of coastal and riverine flood risk are further discussed in this section.
East Boston has the most land area of all Boston neighborhoods exposed to coastal storms in the coming decades, with exposure concentrated near the East Boston Greenway, Maverick Square, and the Sumner and Callahan Tunnels. Nearly 50 percent of East Boston’s land area will be exposed to coastal flooding at the 1 percent annual chance event as soon as the 2070s.
9 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
 DEFINITIONS
Near term: Beginning 2030s, assumes 9 inches of sea level rise
Midterm: Beginning 2050s, assumes 21 inches of sea level rise
Long term: Beginning 2070s or later, assumes 36 inches of sea level rise
Exposure: Can refer to people, buildings, infrastructure, and other resources within areas likely to experience hazard impacts. Does not consider conditions that may prevent or limit impacts.
Vulnerability: Refers to how and why people or assets can be affected by a hazard. Requires site-specific information.
Consequence: Illustrates to what extent people or assets can be expected to
be affected by a hazard, as a result of vulnerability and exposure. Consequences can often be communicated in terms of economic losses.
Annualized losses: The sum of the probability-weighted losses for all four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level rise scenario. Probability-weighted losses are the losses for a single event times the probability of that event occurring in a given year.
*For a full list of definitions, refer to the Glossary in the Appendix.
LEGEND
   21 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
 242 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
36 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
Focus Areas 243
  
 By the end of the century, land area exposed to flooding from coastal storms will more than triple as additional entry points for flooding become present. Along the East Boston Greenway, frequent flooding from high tides will be likely.
Climate resilience planning must consider East
Boston’s multiple low-lying waterfront edges to address neighborhood exposure as
a whole. Nevertheless, the waterfronts near the East Boston Greenway and the Sumner and Callahan Tunnels are exposed in the near term and should be addressed earliest.
Throughout the century, the majority of the East Boston waterfront, parts of Logan Airport, and some inland residential areas are expected to be exposed to sea level rise and coastal storms. In total, 16 percent of the land area in East Boston may be exposed to low-probability flooding in the near term, increasing to almost 50 percent of the neighborhood exposed to low-probability events later in the century.
There are two critical low-lying entry points along the coast that allow for inland flooding in the near term. High-tide flooding expected later in the century may use these same pathways. First, the southern end of East Boston is exposed via the East Boston Greenway (see 1 on map to left). Second, the area south of Bennington Street is exposed by a low point to the west of the Sumner and Callahan tunnel entrances (2). The two pathways expose
the strip adjacent to the East Boston Greenway to inland flooding throughout the century, from the neighborhood’s southern waterfront to the Wood Island MBTA Station in the north (3). Later in the century, flood exposure expands from this area west toward Bennington Street and east toward Logan Airport. In addition, waterfront areas near Harborwalk Park (4) and between Logan Airport and Constitution Beach Park (5) are also projected to be exposed to flooding by many coastal storm events late in the century.
Further north in East Boston, between Orient Heights and Wordsworth Street, both sides of
the neighborhood are expected to be exposed to flooding from high-probability storms in the second half of the century (6). Constitution Beach Park (7) and the Chelsea River waterfront (8) will both be exposed during the same time period.
O’Donnell Elementary, East Boston High School, Bradley School not exposed.
Orient Heights BHA Housing not exposed.
244 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 245
  
EXPOSURE
POPULATION & INFRASTRUCTURE
As soon as the 2070s, almost 50 percent of current East Boston residents and parts of Logan Airport will be directly exposed to high-probability coastal flood events (10 percent annual chance).
POPULATION AND SOCIAL VULNERABILITIES
East Boston is currently home to over 40,500 people.
East Boston has high concentrations of different types of socially vulnerable populations, some of the densest within Boston. The neighborhood is racially diverse, with people of color comprising 63 percent of residents, compared to the citywide average of 53 percent, and over 50 percent of residents are Latino. In particular, 44 percent of residents have limited English proficiency, higher than Boston as a whole.
EAST BOSTON POPULATION EXPOSURE
Close to 300 residents in East Boston could be exposed or displaced by frequent flooding (high tides) in the near term, a number that is expected to skyrocket to over 6,200 people exposed to high tides by the end of the century. This is compared to over 19,000 people exposed to low-probability storms later in the century, almost half of East Boston’s population.
Only 14 percent of East Boston’s low-income residents own cars, indicating that these populations depend disproportionately on
public transportation. The limited availability of vehicular transportation options to East Boston residents indicates a strong need to harden local emergency services and shelter operations against flood impacts. When only flood depths, resident income, and age are considered, East Boston can expect over 1,800 residents to require shelter during and after low-probability storms later in the century. This is second only to South End, whose entire neighborhood will be exposed to coastal storms during the same period. Around 1,300 people are expected to require shelter for low-probability events (1 percent annual chance) expected as soon as the 2050s. East Boston’s emergency shelter capacity, 517 people and 96 animals, may not be adequate for the scale of flooding expected in the second half of the century. Furthermore, all of the neighborhood’s existing emergency shelters will be exposed to high- probability flood impacts later in the century (10 percent annual chance).
As soon as the 2070s, Boston Housing Authority’s Heritage Development along Sumner Street will be exposed to high-probability (10 percent annual chance) flood events.
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
  246 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 247

INFRASTRUCTURE
East Boston includes many significant transportation assets, including Logan Airport, Interstate 90, Route 1A, and
the MBTA Blue and Silver Lines. Critical evacuation routes are exposed to a major storm in all sea level rise scenarios.
Since East Boston is separated from other neighborhoods by Boston Harbor, Boston needs transportation connectivity to enable access to Logan Airport from other neighborhoods and to enable access to healthcare from East Boston. Eight I-90 and Route 1A tunnels’ exits and entrances are located within the flood extent for low-probability events in the near term. Flooding of I-90 and
Route 1A would present complications to safe evacuation, and avoidance of flooded areas can lead to overstressed and crowded side streets when drivers seek alternate routes.
Four MBTA Blue Line stations and a Silver Line station are also located within future flood extents. If exposed Blue Line stations were rendered inoperable, nearly 14,000 individuals that enter
the stations to use the line on an average weekday would be in need of alternative transportation options.1 The Blue Line’s Airport and Wood
Island Stations both lie along the low-lying East Boston Greenway and will be exposed to high- probability (10 percent annual chance) floods as soon as the 2050s. Although the Maverick Station is not exposed to coastal and riverine flooding during this century, the Aquarium MBTA Station Downtown is also exposed to high-probability events in the near-term. If the Aquarium Station
1 Based on 2014 MBTA ridership and service statistics. Number only captures station entries and does not include all passengers traveling on the line as it passes through the station.
is rendered inoperable, Blue Line service could
be interrupted from Downtown through Revere. Flooded MBTA stations or inundated roads that limit bus mobility represent a concern for East Boston’s physical disconnection from the rest of the City, especially for the low-income population without vehicle access.
East Boston’s police and fire services will be exposed to severe, lower-probability coastal storms and sea level rise in the late century. East Boston has four fire stations; half will be exposed to low-probability flood events expected as soon as the 2050s, and three will be exposed to low- probability flood events expected as soon as
the 2070s, including the Fire Headquarters. Two exposed law enforcement stations make up the entire law enforcement capacity in East Boston, including the Massachusetts state police station
at Logan Airport. The state police station will not be exposed until later in the century under low- probability flooding conditions, though the District A-7 station is exposed to lower-probability events in the near term. A proposed multiuse municipal facility—shared by Emergency Medical Services and the Boston Police, Public Works, and Parks and Recreation Departments—will be located just east of the American Legion Playground. While the exact location of the various buildings within the site is still being studied, the adjacent intersection of E. Eagle Street and Eagle Square will be exposed to very low-probability flood events in the late century (0.1 percent annual chance). As East Boston is relatively isolated from the rest of Boston, fire and police assets are essential to maintain
emergency response capacity, and site-specific evaluations must be conducted to assess potential vulnerabilities and impacts.
While the pump station serving East Boston’s sanitary sewage needs is itself protected against storm surge, inundation of access roads may result in repair delays and periods of interrupted sanitary sewer service.
The Caruso pump station, located to the southwest of the Chelsea Street Bridge along the Chelsea River, serves all of East Boston’s sanitary sewage needs. The facility itself is protected against
storm surge, but local access roads to the facility are expected to experience flooding during low- probability mid-century events (1 percent annual chance). If the pump station were rendered inoperable, inundated or damaged roads may delay response time of repair crews and result in longer periods of interrupted sanitary sewer service in East Boston.
Exposure to petroleum storage facilities in East Boston may impact Logan Airport operations and other fuel users.
East Boston shares the Chelsea River Bulk Petroleum Storage Facilities site with Chelsea, across the river. Portions of the Sunoco East Boston facility on this site appear to be exposed to high- probability (10 percent annual chance) flooding in the near term and may be exposed to monthly tides later in the century. The Sunoco facility provides
jet fuel to Logan Airport for daily operations and home heating fuel for other areas throughout the city. Nevertheless, Massport has identified backup fuel sources for use in emergency situations.
 Logan Airport is operated by Massport. Massport has a detailed operational resilience plan for all its assets to ensure safety and continuity of critical operations
in the event of a flood. Should a service interruption occur, Massport’s level of service planning goal is to restore operations during and after disruptive events as soon as possible in a safe and economically viable time frame, based on asset criticality. The rental car center, portions of Airport Way, and Terminal A are exposed to the high- probability flooding expected as soon as the 2070s, while Terminal E, airport service roads, and portions of runways fall within the flood extents for a low-probability event (1 percent annual chance) in the same time period. Specific assets critical for recovery operations have been protected against flood impacts; protections include redundant generators, emergency pumps, and backup fuel sources. As a key player of East Boston’s economy,
the resilience of Logan Airport will heavily influence East Boston’s recovery after a flood event. Massport’s robust planning efforts at Logan Airport in an attempt to address such dependence can serve as an example for other organizations.
248 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 249

EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCES
BUILDINGS AND ECONOMY
RISK TO BUILDINGS
Throughout the century, about two- thirds of structures and half of the building footprint that are expected to be impacted by coastal flooding are residential or mixed-use in nature.
Like Charlestown, the majority of structures in East Boston are one or multifamily residential buildings averaging around three stories tall. Exposure to buildings in East Boston increases rapidly with
sea level rise and event severity. For example,
in the near term, East Boston represents just 16 percent of all buildings expected to be exposed to high-probability flood events throughout Boston (10 percent annual chance) but increases to 50 percent of all of Boston’s buildings exposed to low- probability events. Even with East Boston’s high volume of exposed buildings, the neighborhood’s real estate market value exposed to low-probability
EAST BOSTON BUILDING EXPOSURE
  events in the near term is a relatively low share of Boston’s exposed real estate for the same time frame (9 percent).
The number of buildings expected to flood at the
1 percent annual chance event triples between the near term and the end of the century. Moreover, East Boston is consistently one of the top neighborhoods with regard to expected physical damage and other flood losses to structures. Expected annualized losses to structures jump from about $11 million to over $80 million between the near term and the second half of the century and could double again in the late century. The extensive amount of inland flooding within East Boston, which enters through specific pathways
at the coast, implies that mitigation planning and flood solutions may need to be concentrated at flood entry points on the coast.
More than half of East Boston’s building stock will be exposed
to flooding from low-probability events as soon as the 2070s. With 3,000 buildings exposed, East Boston is second only to South End for this period.
 EAST BOSTON MARKET VALUE EXPOSURE
 250 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 251

 RISK TO THE ECONOMY
As of 2014, East Boston’s local economy produces over $6 billion annually in sales and revenues (output) and sustains over 28,000 jobs. The neighborhood’s economy is heavily dependent
on Logan Airport and the air transportation industry, which generate almost $2.5 billion in output within East Boston. Logan Airport is New England’s largest transportation center and is a major employment hub for Boston, employing approximately 12,000 people. Industries related to air travel, including service-based industries, car rental operations, and hotels, also have a strong presence within East Boston and are responsible for 9 percent of the area’s total output.
Direct annualized impacts to output in East Boston expected for later in the century are $30.7 million and 270 jobs (see Appendix for detail on methodology). These impacts reflect business operations interrupted after flooding while structures are repaired or businesses relocate. With indirect and induced annual economic impacts included, covering interrupted operations to businesses tied to East Boston’s economy,
losses could increase by another $12.6 million
and 63 jobs. Totaling direct, indirect, and induced impacts, the total annualized effect associated with flooding expected later in the century is $43.3 million and 330 jobs, 19 percent of total losses
for the neighborhood. Key industries affected by these losses include the food services sector, the transportation sector, and the accommodations sector, which provide 47 percent of East Boston’s jobs and employ predominantly middle- and low- income workers.
EAST BOSTON ECONOMIC LOSSES
Tremendous recent and planned residential development activity has contributed to population growth in the neighborhood, especially along the vulnerable waterfront.
Two of the top ten structures with the most annual damages expected for later in the century include recent or planned developments for high-occupancy mixed-use buildings.
41 percent of East Boston’s building stock is projected
to have a 10 percent annual chance of being impacted. Of those buildings, almost 2,300 are residential or mixed-use and house approximately 18,500 people.
 ECONOMIC RISK ASSUMPTIONS
Job and output loss includes direct, indirect, and induced consequences of flood impacts. Direct results are impacts felt within a neighborhood, while indirect and induced results are those expected to be felt throughout Suffolk County as a result
of changes in spending patterns. Results
for both job and output losses are the sum
of annualized values for the four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level
rise scenario. This represents a lower-bound estimate for several reasons. First, not all probabilistic events are considered. Second, the analysis assumes that all impacted businesses eventually reopen, though FEMA estimates that almost 40 percent of small businesses—and up to 25 percent of all businesses—never reopen after experiencing flood impacts. Third, only building areas directly impacted by floodwater are assumed to experience business interruption. This does not consider interruptions of businesses due to loss of power or utility functions. Finally, the analysis only considers existing populations, businesses, and buildings and does not include projections for future growth. Refer to the Appendix for a more detailed explanation of the exposure and consequence analysis.
  EAST BOSTON ANNUALIZED LOSSES
  INDUSTRY
  ANNUALIZED LOSS OF ECONOMIC OUTPUT
  Restaurants Insurance activities Transportation Remaining industries Total
$10,800,000 $7,400,000 $3,800,000 $21,300,000 $43,400,000
          252 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 253

  EXPECTED ANNUALIZED LOSSES TO STRUCTURES AND CONTENTS
36 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE AT 10%, 2%, 1%, 0.1% ANNUAL CHANCE COASTAL FLOOD EVENTS.
   EAST BOSTON ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
   254 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 255
Each circle represents annualized losses suffered by an individual building. Larger circle size indicates higher contents and structures losses. Annualized losses take into consideration the annual probability of an event occurring, as well as the projected impacts of such an event.
 Probable annualized losses are based on generalized assumptions, as opposed to site-specific assessment of structures. Site-specific evaluations of vulnerability are beyond the scope of this assessment and should be reserved for detailed evaluation of specific resilience initiatives or a next phase of this project.
 
EAST BOSTON
APPLICATION OF RESILIENCE INITIATIVES
PROTECTED SHORES
DEVELOP LOCAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE PLANS TO SUPPORT DISTRICT-SCALE CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The City should develop a local climate resilience plan for East Boston to support district-scale climate adaptation. The plan should include the following:
◦ Community engagement through a local climate resilience committee, leveraging existing community- led organizations and efforts in East Boston, including the ClimateCARE effort being led by Neighborhood of Affordable Housing (NOAH).
◦ Land-use planning for future flood protection systems, including Flood Protection Overlay Districts in strategically important “flood breach points” identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Flood protection feasibility studies, evaluating district-scale flood protection, including at locations identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Infrastructure adaptation planning through the Infrastructure Coordination Committee. For East Boston, the Massachusetts Port Authority (Massport) is a key partner, and it has already undertaken significant adaptation planning for its buildings, infrastructure, and operations related to Logan.
◦ Coordination with other plans, including Imagine Boston 2030, GoBoston 2030, Special Planning Areas, and any updates to the East Boston Municipal Harbor Plan.
◦ Development of financing strategies and governance structures to support district-scale adaptation.
ESTABLISH FLOOD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS AND REQUIRE POTENTIAL INTEGRATION WITH FLOOD PROTECTION
The Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should petition the Boston Zoning Commission to create new Flood Protection Overlay Districts in areas that
are strategically important for potential future flood protection infrastructure (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below). Within a Flood Protection Overlay District, a developer would be required to submit a study of how a proposed project could be integrated into a future flood protection system; options may include raising and reinforcing the development site or providing room for a future easement across the site.
To reduce the risk of coastal flooding at major inundation points, the City should study the feasibility of constructing district-scale flood protection at the primary flood entry points in East Boston (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below for a preliminary identification of locations and potential benefits).
These feasibility studies should take place in the context of local climate resilience plans, featuring engagement with local community stakeholders, coordination with infrastructure adaptation, and considerations of how flood protection would impact or be impacted by neighborhood character and growth. Examples of prioritization criteria include the timing of flood risk, consequences for
people and economy, social equity, financial feasibility, and potential for additional benefits beyond flood risk reduction.
  PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT- SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
 256 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 257

 POTENTIAL DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION LOCATIONS2
See the District-Scale Flood Protection Systems Overview section (p.330) for a citywide perspective on district-scale flood protection. District-scale flood protection is only one piece of a multilayered solution that includes prepared and connected communities, resilient infrastructure, and adapted buildings.
LOCATIONS
◦ The Jeffries Point to Central Square location focuses on flood entry points along the western and southern edges of the waterfront. Potential flood protection solutions could consist of a north/south alignment connecting high points near Central Square and LoPresti Park and an east/west alignment connecting high points at Maverick Square and Jeffries Point. The north/south segment could potentially tie into existing green space at LoPresti Park and could help create new waterfront access points along East Boston’s western edge. The east/west segment could potentially tie into existing and planned open spaces along the southern waterfront, such as Piers Park, Brophy Park, and Porzio Park.
◦ The Porzio Park location focuses on a flood entry point near where Jeffries Point meets Logan Airport. Potential flood protection solutions could connect high points at
Sumner Street and Harborside Drive, near the entrance to the Ted Williams Tunnel, with the potential to tie in to existing green space along Massport’s Harborwalk Park.
◦ The Wood Island location focuses on flood entry points along the northern edge of Logan Airport, just east of the Wood Island T Station. Potential flood protection solutions could connect high points along Belle Isle Inlet to the northern part of Logan Airport, with the potential to tie into existing green spaces at Constitution Beach or Wood Island Bay Edge Park.
2These preliminary coastal flood protection concepts are based on a high-level analysis of existing topography, rights-of-way, and urban and environmental conditions. Important additional factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions, and zoning, as well as any potential external impacts as a result of the project have not been studied in detail. As described in Initiatives 5-2 and 5-3, detailed feasibility studies, including appropriate public and stakeholder engagement, are required in order to better understand the costs and benefits of flood protection in each location.
3Additional flood protection may be required for flood events more severe than the 1 percent annual chance flood. See Appendix for more detailed information on expected effectiveness of flood protection systems, including analysis of additional flood protection locations and flood frequencies.
Orient Heights
Wood Island
Porzio Park
◦ The Orient Heights location focuses on
flood entry points near Constitution Beach and along Chelsea Creek. Potential flood protection solutions could consist of two segments: an eastern segment by Constitution Beach, connecting high points near Byron Street and Barnes Avenue, and a western segment by Chelsea Creek, connecting high points near Boardman Street and Eagle Street.
DETAILED CONSIDERATIONS
 In the near term, flood protection between Jeffries Point and Central Square is critical to address flood entry points along the western and southern edges of the East Boston waterfront.
As sea level rise (SLR) progresses, additional locations, which would provide modest flood protection in the near term, will become critical:
◦ By Porzio Park, addressing flood entry points near where Jeffries Point meets Logan Airport
◦ By Wood Island, addressing flood entry points along the northern edge of Logan Airport, just east of the Wood Island T Station
◦ By Orient Heights, addressing flood entry points near Constitution Beach and along Chelsea Creek
◦
Multiple alignments likely needed in the second half of the century: With 9 inches of sea level rise (SLR), flood protection between Jeffries Point and Central Square may provide substantial protection against severe, low- probability floods (1 percent annual chance). Adding protection by Porzio Park would be necessary to protect against low-probability (1 percent annual chance) events with 21 inches of SLR, meaning that they do not provide substantial protection from floodwaters
on their own. Flood pathways from these locations become connected at the 1 percent annual chance event with 21 inches of SLR, necessitating review to determine whether both measures would be required to prevent extensive flooding. Very low-probability
(0.1 percent annual chance) storms expected mid-century may require interventions
by Wood Island to prevent flood pathway connections from Logan Airport. Considering 36 inches of LR, flood protection from Jeffries Point to Central Square, by Porzio Park,
and by Wood Island will be necessary to protect large portions of East Boston from high-probability events (10 percent annual chance). Nevertheless, stronger events with lower probability of occurrence may find a possible flood pathway from Constitution Beach. Interventions by Orient Heights may be necessary to prevent flooding in the southern portion of East Boston for the 2 percent annual chance event with 36 inches of SLR.
◦ Protection of Logan Airport: Portions
of Logan Airport may also benefit from combined flood protection at the four locations identified above. Additional flood protection along the Boston Inner Harbor and Boston Main Channel would serve to protect the majority of flooding expected at Logan later in the century.
 SLR SCENARIO
  DISTRICT SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD3
  9” SLR (2030s–2050s)
36” SLR
(2070s or later)
Jeffries Point to Central Square
All locations combined
Jeffries Point to Central Square
   21” SLR (2050s–2100s)
  Jeffries Point to Central Square and Porzio Park combined and Orient Heights
  258 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 259

PREPARED & CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
CONDUCT AN OUTREACH CAMPAIGN TO PRIVATE FACILITIES THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS TO ENSURE THAT THEY ENGAGE IN EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND ADAPTATION PLANNING
The City should conduct outreach to managers of facilities in East Boston that serve significant concentrations of vulnerable populations and are not required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans under current regulations. Targeted facilities will include affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment centers, daycare facilities, food pantries, small nonprofit offices, and others. Illustrative examples of the types of facilities to which the City might conduct outreach include the East Boston YMCA, East Boston Head Start/Elbow child care facility, and East Boston Neighborhood Health Center. These facilities are exposed to near-term damage from sea level rise and coastal flooding, in addition to access issues related to near-term stormwater flooding.4 The City may be able to partner with the Neighborhood of Affordable Housing (NOAH) on this outreach, given their extensive resilience education efforts to date.
The City should reach out to small businesses in East Boston exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term or coastal flooding under a 1 percent annual chance event at 9 inches of SLR to help them develop business continuity plans, evaluate insurance coverage needs, and identify low-cost physical adaptations. All four of East Boston’s major commercial districts (Maverick Square, Central Square, Day Square, and Orient Heights) lie within the 9-inch floodplain. Under a 1 percent annual chance event with 9 inches of SLR, 83 commercial buildings and 133 mixed-use buildings that could host small businesses are exposed to flood risk.
4The City did not review the extent of existing preparedness planning as part of this study.
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
ESTABLISH INFRASTRUCTURE COORDINATION COMMITTEE
The Infrastructure Coordination Committee (ICC) should support coordinated adaptation planning for East Boston’s key infrastructure systems, including transportation, water and sewer, energy, telecommunications, and environmental assets. In the near term, the City should support the MBTA in conducting its planned asset-level vulnerability assessment of the Blue
Line, which is highly exposed to flooding. At 9 inches of SLR,
the Wood Island, Orient Heights, and Suffolk Downs stops are exposed to flooding under the 1 percent annual chance event.
At 21 inches of SLR, four of East Boston’s five Blue Line stops are exposed to flooding at the 1 percent annual chance event. The City also should support MassDOT in pursuing adaptation plans for Central Artery and tunnel assets developed under the 2015 FHA/MassDOT vulnerability assessment.
The 2016 Boston Community Energy Study identified Central Square as a potential location for an emergency microgrid, based on its concentration of critical facilities. The Environment Department should work with local stakeholders and utility providers to explore this location, recognizing that portions
of the proposed site are exposed to high-probability coastal flooding in the near term, as well as stormwater flooding.
The Environment Department also should work with the Massachusetts Port Authority to evaluate opportunities for an expansion of the existing solar power capacity at Logan Airport, given that the 2016 Boston Community Energy Study identified it as having high solar generation potential.
  CONDUCT FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
 EXPAND BOSTON’S SMALL BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
 260 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 261

ADAPTED BUILDINGS
PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS FOR PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
Upon amending the zoning code to support climate readiness (see Initiative 9-2, p.135), the Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should immediately notify all developers with projects in the development pipeline in the future floodplain that they may alter their plans in a manner consistent with the zoning amendments (e.g., elevating their first-floor ceilings without violating building height limits), without needing to restart the BPDA permitting process. Currently, 56 residential and 18 commercial buildings are under construction or permitted in East Boston, representing 2,111 additional housing units and 85,000 SF of new commercial space.
The Boston Planning and Development Agency should incorporate future climate considerations (long-term projections for extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding) into major planning efforts in East Boston.
ESTABLISH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS, SUPPORTED BY A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate
risks and actions they can undertake to address these risks. To prepare for the most immediate risks, the City should prioritize audits for buildings with at least a 1 percent annual chance of exposure to coastal and riverine flooding in the near term, under 9 inches of sea level rise. In East Boston, this includes 1,069 structures, with 74 percent of these consisting of residential and mixed-use buildings that house residents. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost- effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements.
The Office of Budget Management should work with City departments to prioritize upgrades to municipal facilities in East Boston that demonstrate high levels of vulnerability (in terms of the timing and extent of exposure), consequences of partial or full failure, and criticality (with highest priority for impacts on life and safety) from coastal flooding in the near term. In the near term, at 9 inches of SLR, Fire Department Engine 9 (Ladder 2), Boston Police Department District
A-7, Mario Umana Academy, and BHA’s Heritage housing complex are exposed to flooding under the 1 percent annual flood event. To address extreme heat risks, the City should prioritize backup power installation at municipal facilities that demonstrate high levels of criticality, including specific Boston Centers for Youth and Family and Boston Public School facilities that serve as emergency shelters.
  INCORPORATE FUTURE CLIMATE CONDITIONS INTO AREA PLANS AND ZONING AMENDMENTS
 PREPARE MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
 262 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 263

 Roxbury
71,600
CURRENT RESIDENTS
10,000
BUILDINGS
24,800
JOBS
$4.2 Billion
ANNUAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT
ROXBURY TODAY
Image Source: Roxbury Historical Society
Roxbury, at the geographic center of Boston, began as
a farming town on the outskirts of Boston and then transitioned to industrial and residential uses in the
early nineteenth century. In the early twentieth century, Roxbury experienced waves of immigration, and in the 1940s and 1950s, it became a center for African Americans migrating from the American South.
Today Roxbury is home to a diverse community. Roxbury is a center for families, with more households with children under five than any neighborhood in Boston. In addition, compared to other neighborhoods in the city, Roxbury has disproportionately high concentrations of people of color, low- to no-income residents, and people with disabilities.
Today, Roxbury has almost 28,000 housing units, about half of which are subsidized housing, and about 400 new units under construction or approved. Roxbury has active neighborhood groups who engage the community in both development and preservation efforts. Roxbury
has over 24,000 jobs concentrated in the healthcare, local government, and education sectors. Roxbury Community College and Boston Public Schools are key neighborhood employers. However, many of Roxbury’s lower-income residents work in service industry jobs and may depend on public transit to commute to jobs all over the city and region. Dudley Square has long been a commercial hub for the area and serves as a transit hub for a number of MBTA buses and the Silver Line.
While Roxbury includes several parks that offer residents substantial green space, including Franklin Park, its status as a dense, urban neighborhood with a lack of tree coverage in some areas contributes to urban heat island effect. Its inland location away from cooling coastal breezes also adds to higher summer temperatures. Heat island analysis reveals that Roxbury has some of the hottest daytime temperatures in the City of Boston during summer months.
22,000
OLDER ADULTS & CHILDREN*
29%
LOW-TO-NO INCOME RESIDENTS
950
BUILDINGS EXPOSED TO STORMWATER FLOODING**
180 acres
LAND AREA FLOODED BY STORMWATER**
*HEAT VULNERABLE **LATE CENTURY SCENARIO
ROXBURY IMPACTS & RISK FACTORS
 264 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
 Roxbury, like many neighborhoods in Boston, is at the convergence of several future climate hazards and vulnerabilities.
COASTAL FLOODING
STORMWATER FLOODING
URBAN HEAT ISLAND
SOCIAL VULNERABILITY
Focus Areas 265
  
CLIMATE HAZARDS
Roxbury faces multiple vulnerabilities and is exposed to coastal and stormwater flooding and extreme heat.
Roxbury has some of the highest poverty rates in all of Boston.
Roxbury’s road infrastructure faces significant risk for disruption by stormwater flooding in a 10 year, 24 hour storm in the future.
180 acres of land (6% of total land area) are at risk for flooding in the long-term.
URBAN HEAT ISLAND - 2015
SOCIAL VULNERABILITY OVERLAP
  Heat Island
More Extreme Heat Island Most Extreme Heat Island
LEGEND
Roxbury is at risk for stormwater flooding; even today the drainage system can be overwhelmed by heavy rains. More frequent intense storms
will cause this type of flooding to increase. The Lower Roxbury and Hampton George areas are expected to experience significant flooding in low-lying areas. Key areas of potential impact include the northern edge of Malcom X Park in Washington Park North as well as the area north of King Towers Public Housing on MLK Boulevard.
LEGEND
MBTA Silver Line Station
MBTA Station Roads
Major Roads Evacuation Routes Parks
Roxbury Boundary School
College or University
H Hospital
HC Health Clinic
1 Grove Hall Community Center
2 Shelburne Community Center
3 Vine Street Community Center
BHA Public Housing Senior Housing
DCR Spray Deck or Pool
Areas on both sides of Melnea Cass Boulevard
and surrounding Boston Medical Center are also anticipated to experience stormwater flooding in
a 10 year, 24 hour storm. However, this flooding analysis evaluates capacity of the existing drainage system; BWSC is upgrading pipes and expanding system capacity, which will reduce the expected flooding.
 Roxbury faces risk from several climate hazards.
Today and in the future, stormwater flooding can cause damages and nuisances that create localized challenges for neighborhood mobility and function, and extreme heat endangers residents with vulnerable health. With 36 inches of sea level rise, coastal storm flooding could reach areas north of Melnea Cass Boulevard
As average temperatures and frequency of heat waves rise in the future, people across Boston will need to seek relief from dangerous extremes
more often. Roxbury is one of the neighborhoods that experience some of the hottest temperatures in the city during summer months. Lack of tree canopy, a high percentage of impervious surface, and lack of coastal breezes contribute to heat island effect in the neighborhood. Within the heat island areas live many concentrations of populations that are vulnerable to heat including older residents and children.
 266 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 267

EXPOSURE & CONSEQUENCES
PEOPLE
Roxbury’s population faces multiple vulnerabilities
Roxbury has a richly diverse population; 83% of residents are people of color, the second highest concentration of people of color in the entire city and much higher than Boston as a whole. The vast majority of the population of this neighborhood falls into at least one vulnerable category and most fall into several categories described below.
Roxbury is a stressed neighborhood in many ways. Lack of high quality transportation and fewer redundancies in transportation options
in many areas of the neighborhood can strain Roxbury’s households in getting to and from employment and in accessing healthcare resources. The Orange Line runs along the neighborhood’s western border and the Silver Line provides high quality service to Dudley Square; however, heavy rail or rapid bus service does not penetrate into
the southern portions of the neighborhood. Much of Roxbury is also designated as a food desert by the USDA1 which creates challenges in accessing healthy food and supplies on a daily basis and for sheltering in place in a climate event.
Roxbury has high concentrations of vulnerable populations, but also many community organizations and non-profits that serve residents. Several Boston Centers for Youth and Families (BCYF) connect residents to resources and information and act as cooling centers. Community development corporations advocate for the neighborhood and develop affordable housing. These organizations help supplement the resource network for residents who have special needs and vulnerabilities and enhance resilience in the community in hazard events
1Source: USDA Economic Research Service-Food Access Research Atlas
   VULNERABLE POPULATIONS
        OLDER ADULTS
Roxbury has a lower percentage (8%) of older adults than the city at large (10%), but has ten senior housing developments and three nursing homes within the neighborhood. Care should be taken to educate seniors who live in these developments about the risks of hot weather to their health and to ensure all developments have adequate air conditioning. Shady outdoor locations like public parks can also provide respite during hot days.
CHILDREN
Roxbury has a relatively high concentration of children; 23% percent of households have at least one child under 5 years
old. Children are at risk to the stress of hot temperatures if they do not have adequate access to air conditioned spaces or green spaces to help stay cool. Children also suffer the mental stress of other flooding and other emergencies more than adults. Many children
in Roxbury are already bearing the stress of living in an under resourced neighborhood.
PEOPLE OF COLOR
Roxbury’s population is 83% people of color. 35% of residents are black, and the neighborhood is also home to significant Hispanic (22%) and Asian (9%) populations. Roxbury is a rich confluence of many different cultures, but also faces a legacy of racial inequities.
LIMITED ENGLISH
Over 11,000 residents (16% of Roxbury’s population) have limited English proficiency and may need targeted information campaigns
to increase awareness about climate risks. These residents are fairly spread out throughout the neighborhood. Among those with limited English proficiency, the most common languages spoken are Spanish or Spanish Creole (24%), Chinese (10%), African languages (4%) and Portuguese (3%).
LOW-TO-NO INCOME
39% of Roxbury’s population is low-to-no income, and Roxbury has five public housing developments, including the King Towers (100 units) which is projected to experience stormwater flooding from a 10 year, 24 hour storm as early as 2030. Low income residents dependent on public transportation in southern areas of the neighborhood are
only served by buses. HUD housing projects as a policy do not include air conditioning in housing units, which increases health risks in a heat wave.
MEDICAL ILLNESS
Medically ill residents in Roxbury may have symptoms worsened by the physical stress of a heat wave. The Washington Park South area has a very high concentration of medically ill. For residents without air conditioning, the cooling center at Grove Hall Community Center is likely the most convenient center. The entire census tract that has the highest concentration of medically ill is within a 3/4 mile radius of the cooling center.
DISABILITIES
15% of Roxbury’s population has a disability. That is over 10,000 people who may find it more difficult to evacuate or seek shelter in an extreme weather event (like the 2014 snow storms). Many of this population already face mobility challenges that could be worsened by stormwater flooding on sidewalks. Concentrations are fairly evenly distributed across Roxbury.
Focus Areas 269
268 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Source: USDA Economic Research Service-Food Access Research Atlas
ROXBURY STATISTICS
TOTAL POP
71,600
%% ROXBURY BOSTON
OLDER ADULTS CHILDREN
PEOPLE OF COLOR LIMITED ENGLISH LOW-TO-NO INCOME MEDICAL ILLNESS DISABILITY
5,800 16,690 59,160 11,400 27,690 24,010 10,420
8% 10% 23% 17% 83% 52% 16% 15% 39% 28% 34% 37% 15% 11%

 EXPOSURE & CONSEQUENCES
Road disruption by stormwater flooding threatens neighborhood mobility; residential structures face the greatest exposure to flooding
Road flooding can be caused by even a few inches
of rain in a short period and can block access to services, force businesses to close, and leave cars
and transit riders stranded. Furthermore, flooded roads can be a safety risk when cars attempt to cross flooded areas and become stranded. Melnea Cass Boulevard is already impacted today in heavy rains and is projected to experience significant flooding at the intersection with Harrison Ave and onto South Bay Harbor Trail. South of Melnea Cass Boulevard, Hampden and Gerard Streets are also at risk. Melnea Cass flooding will also impact the BWSC headquarters and fueling center.
Projected road flooding impacts several bus routes on Massachusetts Avenue and Melnea Cass Boulevard. Dale Street adjacent to Malcom X Park serves as the access road for the Sojourner House food pantry and could be blocked in a flooding event.
The Amtrak/MBTA rail lines between Tremont and Columbus Avenue are exposed to flooding. The rail lines serve the Amtrak Shore Line and the Orange Line. Suspended service or lack of access to transit could have serious consequences for Roxbury residents who may not be able to get to work or access healthcare; it also hurts businesses in the area.
The majority of stormwater impacts to buildings.
occur in residential buildings. Stormwater flooding could have strong impacts on indoor air quality from
mold, with potential to exacerbate asthma and other health risks. Stormwater flooding is also projected in areas where new development is proposed, including a Northeastern University property slated for new student housing and commercial buildings between Tremont and Columbus Avenue southwest of Douglass Park.
BUILDINGS EXPOSED TO STORMWATER FLOODING
Flood progression into Roxbury takes place through the South End and is described within the vulnerability assessment for that focus area.
ROXBURY BUILDING EXPOSURE
TO STORMWATER FLOODING BY TYPE
10-YEAR, 24-HOUR STORM
 DEFINITIONS
Near-term: Beginning 2030s, assumes 9 inches of sea level rise
Mid-term: Beginning 2050s, assumes 21 inches of sea level rise
Long-term: Beginning 2070s or later, assumes 36 inches of sea level rise Exposure: Can refer to people, buildings, infrastructure, and other resources within areas likely to experience hazard impacts. Does not consider conditions that may prevent or limit impacts.
Vulnerability: Refers to how and why people or assets can be affected by a hazard. Requires site-specific information.
Consequence: illustrates to what extent people or assets can be expected to be affected by a hazard, as a result of vulnerability and exposure. Consequences can often be communicated in terms of economic losses .
Annualized losses: The sum of the probability-weighted losses for all four flood frequencies analyzed
for each sea level rise scenario. Probability-weighted losses are the losses for a single event times the probability of that event occurring in a given year.
*For a full list of definitions, refer to the Glossary in the Appendix.
    270 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 271

EXPOSURE
POPULATION & INFRASTRUCTURE
POPULATION AND SOCIAL VULNERABILITIES
Roxbury’s population is not expected to be exposed to coastal flooding until a very low probability event (0.1 percent annual chance) mid-century. Nevertheless, exposure increases significantly later in the century, and rises to over 1,800 persons currently living in areas exposed to the 1 percent annual chance event. Roxbury’s current shelter capacity is 1,300 persons across eight shelters.
Roxbury’s population remains largely unexposed to coastal flood impacts until later in
the century. The focus area is consistently among the least exposed in terms of land area, population, and buildings when compared to other neighborhoods.
ROXBURY POPULATION EXPOSURE
INFRASTRUCTURE
Damage to exposed roads and the MBTA Red Line could isolate Columbia Point from the rest of Dorchester, and impact transportation connections to North Quincy.
The Boston Water and Sewer Commission (BWSC) Headquarters, located in the northern portion
of Roxbury, will be exposed to high-probability flooding later in the century (10 percent annual chance event). As a critical facility, BWSC Headquarters employs system redundancies. Notwithstanding backup power supply, loss
of power to the structure would disable all
computerized systems , including work order management, and major building functions such as vehicle fueling. Such functionality disruptions at the Headquarters building may result in delayed repair of BWSC assets throughout Greater Boston.
Facilities which support Roxbury’s police and fire services are exposed to sea level rise and coastal storms.
In northern Roxbury, the Suffolk County Sheriff, MBTA Transit Police Headquarters, and two of three fire stations are exposed to the high-probability storms expected by later in the century (10 percent annual chance event).
   272 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 273

 ECONOMIC RISK ASSUMPTIONS
Job and output loss includes direct, indirect, and induced consequences of flood impacts. Direct results are impacts felt within a neighborhood, while indirect and induced results are those expected
to be felt throughout Suffolk County as a result
of changes in spending patterns. Results for both job and output losses are the sum of annualized values for the four flood frequencies analyzed
for each sea level rise scenario. This represents a lower-bound estimate for several reasons. First, not all probabilistic events are considered. Second,
the analysis assumes that all impacted businesses eventually reopen, though FEMA estimates that almost 40 percent of small businesses—and up to 25 percent of all businesses—never reopen after experiencing flood impacts. Third, only building areas directly impacted by floodwater are assumed to experience business interruption. This does not consider interruptions of businesses due to loss of power or utility functions. Finally, the analysis only considers existing populations, businesses,
and buildings and does not include projections
for future growth. Refer to the Appendix for a
more detailed explanation of the exposure and consequence analysis.
EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCES
BUILDINGS AND ECONOMY
RISK TO BUILDINGS
Almost 80 structures in Roxbury are expected
to be exposed to mid-century coastal flooding for the 0.1 percent annual chance event. This number increases to 450 buildings exposed to high-probability flooding later in the century (1 percent annual chance event). Of the buildings exposed later in the century, 40 percent of them are residential or mixed-use in nature, followed by commercial buildings (20 percent). Though these buildings are only a fraction of Roxbury’s total building stock, the neighborhood can still expect over $30 million in annualized damage to buildings and other related costs with 36 inches of sea level rise.
ROXBURY BUIILDINGS EXPOSURE
RISK TO THE ECONOMY
Dorchester provides Boston with close to 35,000 jobs and over $7 billion in annual output. Top employers in the community include public education, hospitals, and grocers, though no one industry seems to dominate. The economy is heavily service-oriented. As with other service-oriented neighborhood economies, restaurants are expected to be most heavily impacted in a flood event, particularly considering expected loss of employment. This is expected to be the case throughout the century. By late-century, coastal flood impacts to Dorchester are expected to result in 110 annualized jobs lost and about $15 million in annualized output loss to the current Boston economy. Restaurants are expected
to comprise roughly 40 percent of job loss and 20 percent of output loss. Restaurants tend to employ low- to moderate-income personnel, and business interruption to such assets can exacerbate impacts to already vulnerable populations.
ROXBURY REAL ESTATE MARKET VALUE EXPOSURE
ROXBURY ANNUALIZED LOSSES
   INDUSTRY
 ANNUALIZED LOSS OF ECONOMIC OUTPUT
          ROXBURY ECONOMIC LOSSES
Restaurants
Healthcare and medical services
Real estate Other industries Total
$442,000 $188,000
$98,000 $672,000 $1,400,000
        EAST BOSTON ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
 274 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 275

ROXBURY
APPLICATION OF RESILIENCE INITIATIVES
In the near term, coastal flood risk in Roxbury is minimal and likely does not require district-scale flood protection.
As soon as the 2050s, the northern edge of Roxbury will be exposed to flooding from Fort Point Channel and other inland flood pathways, so combined flood protection at multiple locations will be critical:
• At the South Boston Waterfront, addressing inland flood pathways originating from Fort Point Channel, Boston Harbor, and the Reserve Channel
• At Dorchester Bay, addressing inland flood pathways originating from the Old Harbor and Savin Hill Cove
• At the New Charles River Dam, addressing potential overtopping or flanking of the dam
9” SLR None (2030s–2050s)
Dorchester focus area (see p.194), addresses flood pathways from the Old Harbor and Savin Hill Cove.
• The New Charles River Dam location, described in the Charles River and Downtown focus areas (see pp. 174, 216), addresses potential overtopping or flanking of the dam.
DETAILED CONSIDERATIONS
PROTECTED SHORES
PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
To reduce the risk of coastal flooding at major inundation points, the City should study the feasibility of constructing district-scale flood protection at the primary flood
entry points for Roxbury (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below for a preliminary identification of locations and potential benefits). As described below, flood protection systems that would benefit Roxbury would likely be located outside of Roxbury, in South Boston, Dorchester, and by the New Charles River Dam.
These feasibility studies should feature engagement
with local community stakeholders, coordination with infrastructure adaptation, and considerations of how flood protection would impact or be impacted by neighborhood character and growth. Examples of prioritization criteria include the timing of flood risk, consequences for
people and economy, social equity, financial feasibility, and potential for additional benefits beyond flood risk reduction.
POTENTIAL DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION LOCATIONS2
See the District-Scale Flood Protection Systems Overview section (p.330) for a citywide perspective on district-scale flood protection. District-scale flood protection is only one piece of a multilayered solution that includes prepared and connected communities, resilient infrastructure, and adapted buildings.
2These preliminary coastal flood protection concepts are based on a high-level analysis of existing topography, rights-of-way, and urban and environmental conditions. Important additional factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions, zoning, as well as any potential external impacts as a result of the project have not been studied in detail. As described in Initiatives 5-2 and
5-3 (see pp. 106,110), detailed feasibility studies and appropriate public and stakeholder engagement are required in order to better understand the costs and benefits of flood protection in each location.
•
Flood protection at multiple locations likely required to accommodate later-century flood event scenarios: Late century, flood protection solutions at the South Boston Waterfront and Dorchester Bay may not be independently effective for the 1 percent annual chance
event and events with lower probability of occurrence and may require an intervention
at the New Charles River Dam to impede flooding from the Charles River. While investments at all three locations may be significant, losses avoided are expected to be substantial because an integrated system could protect Downtown, South Boston, Dorchester, the South End, Roxbury, and neighborhoods along the Charles River.
  SLR SCENARIO
  DISTRICT SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD3
    21” SLR (2050s–2100s)
  The South Boston Waterfront and Dorchester Bay locations combined
 The New Charles River Dam, South Boston Waterfront, and Dorchester Bay locations combined
LOCATIONS
• The South Boston Waterfront location, described in the South Boston focus area (see p. 282), addresses flood entry points along the edge of the district.
• The Dorchester Bay location, described in the
3Additional flood protection may be required for flood events more severe than the 1 percent annual chance flood. See Appendix for more detailed information on expected effectiveness of flood protection systems, including analysis of additional flood protection locations and flood frequencies.
New Charles River Dam
South Boston Waterfront
36” SLR
(2070s or later)
  Dorchester Bay
  276 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 277

PREPARED & CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
CONDUCT AN OUTREACH CAMPAIGN TO PRIVATE FACILITIES THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS TO ENSURE THAT THEY ENGAGE IN EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND ADAPTATION PLANNING
EXPAND BOSTON’S SMALL BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
UPDATE THE CITY’S HEAT EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN
The City should conduct outreach to managers of
facilities in Roxbury that serve significant concentrations of vulnerable populations and are not required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans under current regulations. The City will inform these facilities about the need to prepare for climate change impacts, especially stormwater flooding and extreme heat in the near term. Targeted facilities will include affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment centers, daycare facilities, food pantries, small nonprofit offices, and others. Illustrative examples of the types of Roxbury facilities to which the City might conduct outreach include the American Red Cross/Boston Pantry, the Sojourner House Food Pantry, and Tartt’s Day Care Center.4
The City should reach out to small businesses in Roxbury that are exposed to stormwater flooding in the near
term to help them develop business continuity plans, evaluate insurance coverage needs, and identify low-cost physical adaptations. In particular, the City will reach out to businesses along Melnea Cass Boulevard, which experiences stormwater flooding impacts today.
The City should pilot components of its heat emergency plan in Roxbury, given the high concentration of socially vulnerable populations there. The City can partner with Renew Boston and the Boston Home Center’s repair program to provide energy-efficient air conditioners for physically homebound people who cannot leave their homes without assistance. The City also can partner with Roxbury nonprofits to establish a network of neighborhood- level volunteers to check in on neighbors during heat events. In addition, the City can partner with community nonprofits and healthcare providers to register disabled residents who lack cooling capacity in their homes register for THE RIDE, if interested, in advance of heat events.
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
ESTABLISH INFRASTRUCTURE COORDINATION COMMITTEE
PROVIDE GUIDANCE ON PRIORITY EVACUATION
AND SERVICE ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE ICC
CONDUCT FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
In the near term, the City will support the MBTA in conducting a full asset-level vulnerability assessment of its system, including the Orange Line. Stormwater flooding is projected to impact bus routes on Massachusetts Avenue and Melnea Cass Boulevard and Orange Line rail lines between Tremont and Columbus Avenue.
The Office of Emergency Management will work with the Boston Transportation Department, Department of Public Works, and Roxbury’s private utilities to develop a list of critical roads to prioritize for adaptation, given that Roxbury’s road infrastructure faces significant risk from stormwater flooding in all future conditions. Melnea Cass Boulevard is already impacted today under heavy rains.
The 2016 Boston Community Energy Study identified several locations in Roxbury as potential locations for energy justice microgrids. This summer, the DOE Combined Heat and Power (CHP) Technical Assistance Partnerships analyzed municipal facilities and affordable housing in Roxbury, concluding
that CHP is economically feasible. The City will work with the community to explore options for microgrids in this neighborhood. The Community Energy Study also found that Roxbury has high solar power generation potential relative to other Boston neighborhoods.
      278 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 279
4The City did not review the extent of existing preparedness planning as part of this study.

ADAPTED BUILDINGS
PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS FOR PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
Upon amending the zoning code to support climate readiness (see Initiative 9-2, p.135), the Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should immediately notify all developers with projects in the development pipeline in the future floodplain that they may alter their plans in a manner consistent with the zoning amendments (e.g., elevating their first-floor ceilings without violating building height limits), without needing to restart the BPDA permitting process. Currently, 31 residential buildings are under construction or permitted in Roxbury, representing 434 additional housing units. To the extent that these buildings are at risk for coastal flooding, the City will reach out to property owners so that they can make necessary adjustments without re-permitting.
The Boston Planning and Development Agency should incorporate future climate considerations (long-term projections for extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding) into major planning efforts in Roxbury.
ESTABLISH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS, SUPPORTED BY A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate risks and actions they can undertake
to address these risks. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost-effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements.
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate risks and actions they can undertake
to address these risks. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost-effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements.
  INCORPORATE FUTURE CLIMATE CONDITIONS INTO AREA PLANS AND ZONING AMENDMENTS
PREPARE MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
  280 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 281

South Boston
Of all Boston focus areas, South Boston consistently faces the greatest or near-greatest exposure and potential losses to coastal flooding across all sea level rise conditions and flood events.
South Boston is a peninsula located to the southeast of Downtown Boston, bounded by
Fort Point Channel and Dorchester Bay. The community includes the South Boston Waterfront to the north, also referred to as the Seaport or the Innovation District, and the Fort Point Channel Landmark District and a historic residential district to the south.
High ground within South Boston, such as Telegraph Hill, illustrates the original landforms of Boston waterfronts before land filling began in the early 1800s; significant portions of the community are filled-in mudflats. South Boston was annexed to the city in 1804 to accommodate Boston’s need for additional residential and commercial land. The Old Colony Railroad opened in 1845.
In recent years, South Boston has experienced rapid transformation as the result of a development boom and significant investment. From 2010–2013,
the South Boston Waterfront was the fastest- growing urban area in the commonwealth, adding approximately ten million square feet of development. The waterfront has become a hub for recreation and culture, with the expansion or opening of numerous attractions, including the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center (opened 2004), Institute of Contemporary Art (opened 2006), and Boston Children’s Museum (renovated 2007), among others. The South Boston Waterfront is expected to increasingly become a mixed-use neighborhood with a large residential population. Seaport Square and Fan Pier are examples of large mixed-use development projects. The area still maintains marine industrial uses to the northeast, tied to the Port of Boston, the Raymond L. Flynn Industrial Park (former Boston Marine Industrial Park), and the Fish Pier.
The historic residential neighborhood to the south has experienced significant real estate appreciation, with an influx of young professionals. The area’s commercial district is centered around East and West Broadway. South Boston contains several large Boston Housing Authority (BHA) housing developments, including West Broadway, West Ninth Street, Old Colony, and Foley.
Due to the rapid changes occurring in this area, the City recently has begun the planning process for several key projects focused on transportation and public realm improvements. Examples include the South Boston Waterfront Plan, the 100 Acres Master Plan process for the areas around the Procter & Gamble Gillette plant, and the Dorchester Avenue Corridor Plan, which is focused on supporting
a diversity of mixed uses between Andrew and Broadway Red Line MBTA Stations.
  Image courtesy of Sasaki
282 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Focus Areas 283

FLOOD PROGRESSION
South Boston is exposed to climate change
impacts including heat, increased precipitation
and stormwater flooding, and sea level rise and coastal and riverine flooding. Exposure to heat and stormwater flooding are addressed in the Citywide Vulnerability Assessment (see p.12), while exposure and consequences to coastal and riverine flood risk are further discussed in this section.
In the near term, a significant portion of the South Boston Waterfront is exposed to high- probability coastal storms (10 percent annual chance events), particularly near Fort Point Channel and to the north along Boston Harbor.
South Boston’s exposure will increase significantly over the course of the century, with a substantial portion of the South Boston Waterfront exposed to both chronic high-tide flooding and more severe flooding during coastal storms. Over the century, flooding from Fort Point Channel and Dorchester Bay will increase, exposing residential areas.
9 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
 DEFINITIONS
Near term: Beginning 2030s, assumes 9 inches of sea level rise
Midterm: Beginning 2050s, assumes 21 inches of sea level rise
Long term: Beginning 2070s or later, assumes 36 inches of sea level rise
Exposure: Can refer to people, buildings, infrastructure, and other resources within areas likely to experience hazard impacts. Does not consider conditions that may prevent or limit impacts.
Vulnerability: Refers to how and why people or assets can be affected by a hazard. Requires site-specific information.
Consequence: Illustrates to what extent people or assets can be expected to
be affected by a hazard, as a result of vulnerability and exposure. Consequences can often be communicated in terms of economic losses.
Annualized losses: The sum of the probability-weighted losses for all four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level rise scenario. Probability-weighted losses are the losses for a single event times the probability of that event occurring in a given year.
*For a full list of definitions, refer to the Glossary in the Appendix.
LEGEND
   21 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
 284 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
36 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
Focus Areas 285
  
 South Boston is the most- exposed1 neighborhood in Boston, with nearly 25 percent of its land area exposed under 9 inches of sea level rise, 50 percent under 21 inches, and 60 percent under 36 inches at the 1 percent annual chance event. Nearly 20 percent of the neighborhood’s land area will be exposed to high tides with 36 inches of sea level rise.
Resilience planning requires consideration of the South Boston Waterfront’s long, low- lying waterfront edges and flood pathways through Fort Point Channel and Joseph Moakley Park, which create challenges for local flood defenses.
In the first half of the century, expected exposure to coastal flooding is primarily due to the low waterfront edges along Fort Point Channel, Boston Harbor, and the Reserved Channel. During this time, nearly a quarter of South Boston’s land area will be exposed to 1 percent annual chance flood events, with some heavily developed areas along the Fort Point Channel also exposed to higher probability events (10 percent annual chance).
In the second half of the century, flood exposure will increase due to flood entry points at Joseph Moakley Park in the southeast and along the
Fort Point Channel that impact inland, largely residential areas in South Boston. With 21 inches of sea level rise, much of the land area north of West First Street and East First Street will be exposed to 10 percent annual chance floods. The probability of flooding across the neighborhood will increase by an order of magnitude by the second half of the century.
Toward the end of the century, considerable portions of the South Boston Waterfront will be exposed to flooding from high tide, and many residential areas are exposed to 10 percent annual chance
1Based on the percentage of the land area in the neighborhood exposed to coastal flooding
286 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 287
  
EXPOSURE
POPULATION & INFRASTRUCTURE
POPULATION AND SOCIAL VULNERABILITY
South Boston is currently home to over 31,000 people. Overall, South Boston has lower numbers and percentages of socially vulnerable groups than other Boston neighborhoods. The neighborhood is less racially diverse than neighboring Dorchester and the South End, with people of color comprising just 22 percent of its population (compared to 52 percent citywide). Twenty-six percent of South Boston residents are those with low to no income (compared to 28 percent citywide). In contrast to other Boston neighborhoods that demonstrate widespread social vulnerability, South Boston has vulnerable groups in concentrated pockets in and around public housing projects in the area.
In both the near and long term, South Boston can expect negative impacts to its population from
DORCHESTER POPULATION EXPOSURE
widespread overland flooding. This flooding is expected to displace residents, interrupt electrical and water service of flooded buildings with mechanical, electrical, and plumbing assets in the basement or first floor, and result in employment and sales losses, most significantly to industries
that support low- to moderate-income populations (see Risk to the Economy, below). In the near term, roughly 100 people currently live in areas expected to be flooded by high tides, and over 1,600 people currently live in areas expected to be flooded by high-probability flood events (10 percent annual chance event). In a significant expansion of risk,
over 2,200 residents currently live in areas expected to be flooded by high tides toward the end of the century. This represents an increase of roughly 22 times from the near term. With 36 inches of sea level rise, between 10,000 and 12,000 people could face displacement under a 1 percent annual chance event.
In the near term, one of South Boston’s emergency shelters (the Curley Center) is expected to be exposed to high-tide flooding. If the Curley Center is compromised, South Boston will lose a quarter of its sheltering capacity (62 people). Further, South Boston’s current sheltering capacity may not be adequate for the scale of flooding expected toward the end of the century, when roughly 1,200 people are expected to require public shelter during a 1 percent annual chance flood event.
In the second half of the century, BHA’s Mary Ellen McCormack Development, the first and still largest public housing development in New England
with 1,016 units in 22 buildings, will be exposed to relatively low-probability events (1 percent annual chance). As soon as the 2070s, the development will be exposed to more frequent (10 percent annual chance) floods.
INFRASTRUCTURE EXPOSURE2
South Boston has important transportation assets located in the future floodplain, including I-90 (Massachusetts Turnpike), the Ted Williams Tunnel entrances and exits, the South Boston Bypass/Massport Haul Road, and William J. Day Boulevard.
In the near term, I-90 and the Ted Williams Tunnel are expected to be exposed to low-probability coastal flooding (1 percent annual chance). The Ted Williams Tunnel links South Boston to East Boston (Logan International Airport) by carrying I-90 under the Boston Harbor, allowing direct access to Route 1A in East Boston. Congress Street and Summer Street, which connect South Boston to Downtown, have portions exposed to a high- probability coastal flood event in the near term.
As soon as the 2050s, South Boston’s remaining evacuation routes, including the South Boston Bypass, (linking the South Boston waterfront to South Bay), Dorchester Avenue, I-93, and William J. Day Boulevard (along the southeastern edge of South Boston) will all be exposed to low-frequency storm events (1 percent annual chance), in addition to many local roads, such as Old Colony Avenue and streets around Joseph Moakley Park. MassDOT’s Stormwater Pump Station 3, which protects the South Boston Bypass, is also exposed to high-probability storm events expected as soon as the 2050s.
2This evaluation is preliminary. Site-specific analysis and detailed cascading impact mapping is necessary to fully understand facility-level and neighborhood vulnerabilities, as well as the extent of potential consequences.
Flooding of evacuation routes and local roads could affect safe evacuation for residents and potentially isolate South Boston during a storm event. With major roadways blocked by floodwaters within and along the outskirts of the neighborhood, it may
be difficult to bring in resources by automobile during an emergency situation. In addition, road closures and flooded tunnels may have an impact on Silver Line operations; eight Silver Line stations are exposed to lower-probability events in the near term (1 percent chance event) and may be exposed to high tides later in the century. Rail options in South Boston are also limited by flood exposure; the Franklin and Greenbush commuter rail lines that run through South Boston will be exposed to low-probability flooding in the second half of the century, and the MBTA’s Red Line may experience difficulty in maintaining operations at the Andrew Station later in the century during the 1 percent annual chance coastal flood event.
Impacts to transportation infrastructure and services in South Boston could have ripple
effects on other neighborhoods—for example, by preventing East Boston residents from traveling down I-90. Tourism may also be affected if conventioneers or cruise travelers are unable to access the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center or the Black Falcon Cruise Terminal. The Black Falcon Cruise Terminal itself may experience impacts in lower probability events as soon as the 2050s (1 percent annual chance).
Focus Areas 289
  288 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston

Widett Circle, an area that Boston seeks to redevelop, will be exposed to high- probability flood impacts expected from mid-century storm events.
Widett Circle has been a focus of several redevelopment initiatives proposed by the MBTA and the BRA. Though the site is no longer the primary recommended location of a train yard
to accommodate South Station expansions, redevelopment of the area must consider sea level rise and coastal flood impacts to ensure that investments are protected in the long term.
Several power assets in South Boston are expected to be exposed under mid- to late- century sea level rise and coastal storm conditions, including four existing substations and a cogeneration facility.
Eversource Energy has constructed a new substation in the South Boston Waterfront to relieve the strain imposed by rapid waterfront development on power and electric systems in
the area. Though Substation 99 is expected to be exposed to low-probability flooding in the near term (1 percent annual chance event), it sits on a 15-foot-high elevated steel platform with reinforced cast-in-place concrete at its base. Sitting almost 26 feet above current mean sea level, this substation
is expected to withstand storm surge and flood scenarios throughout this century.
In addition, the former Boston Edison power
plant at the corner of Summer and First Streets, near the Reserved Channel, will be exposed to flooding from high-probability storm events in
the mid- to late century. While the plant is no longer operational, and the 18-acre site is being offered for redevelopment following environmental
remediation, any remaining contamination at the site could present a threat to public health and safety with flooding.
South Boston’s sanitary sewage system
is exposed to coastal flooding and
sea level rise in the near term. Planned improvements to the sanitary sewage system could mitigate service interruption due to expected flooding.
South Boston’s sanitary sewage system is largely dependent upon two pump stations, one of which will be exposed to a 1 percent annual chance flood event in the near term and a 10 percent annual chance flood event by the second half of the century. While the sewage system and pumps have the capacity to handle large flows in dry weather conditions, overflows are likely during storm events, causing sewage backup into streets, homes, and businesses. Since roads surrounding the pump station are also expected to flood, repair crews might not be able to remedy loss of function right away if the pump station were to fail. A redundant force main is being constructed in order to limit service disruption; these improvements may also mitigate flood impacts.3
The Columbus Park Headworks facility, which will be exposed to low-probability storms in the mid- century, screens wastewater for inorganics and removes sticks, stones, grit, and sand to protect and reduce wear on the Deer Island Wastewater Treatment Plant. The facility currently services a tributary area of approximately 13 miles.4
3A detailed analysis is needed to understand coastal storm impacts to South Boston’s sanitary sewage system.
4Impacts to Boston’s wastewater infrastructure due to flood impacts at this facility require detailed analysis.
Local access roads to the facility are exposed to mid-century low-probability flooding as well, which may inhibit repair crews from addressing potential facility damage.
 Image courtesy of Sasaki
290 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 291
South Boston is expected to experience reduced emergency response capacity as a result of sea level rise.
Of South Boston’s two Emergency Medical Services (EMS) facilities, the EMS Harbor Unit is expected to be exposed to low-probability flooding in the near term (1 percent annual chance). Furthermore, five law enforcement facilities are expected be located within the 1 percent annual chance floodplain in the late century, potentially reducing emergency response capacity within South Boston. South Boston may also become islanded under a late- century storm event, which would limit the ability of outside emergency response vehicles to travel into South Boston. Delayed or reduced emergency response would exacerbate any potential flood impacts.
 

EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCES
BUILDINGS AND ECONOMY
RISK TO BUILDINGS
South Boston comprises close to 60 percent of Boston’s total real estate market value exposed to coastal flooding associated with low-probability events (1 percent annual chance) in the near
term. South Boston is second only to Downtown with total real estate market value expected to
be exposed to flooding during high tides in the near term. In the late century, the community will continue to have the largest share (25 percent) of Boston’s total real estate market value exposed.
Perceived or actual flood risk can affect the value of existing assets as well as insurance and operating costs and the feasibility of future development. This is particularly the case for areas exposed to frequent flood impacts, such as those associated with high tides or high-probability coastal flood events (10 percent annual chance).
South Boston represents almost half of the city’s expected losses to buildings in the near term and will maintain its position as the single most- vulnerable neighborhood,
as measured by projected damage costs through the end of the century.
SOUTH BOSTON REAL ESTATE MARKET VALUE EXPOSURE
While exposure and expected damage costs in South Boston are the most dramatic across the city, these losses are limited to relatively few, very
large structures when compared to other relatively high expected loss neighborhoods.
Compared to other neighborhoods that occupy large shares of Boston’s total expected losses, South Boston has a comparatively small number of buildings exposed to flooding across all coastal storm event scenarios. For example, East Boston has roughly three times as many buildings exposed to low-probability events in the near term as South Boston and ten times as many buildings later in the century. South Boston has a relatively high proportion of large, high-rise buildings exposed, which are expected to experience greater losses than buildings of low and medium height.
While high-rise buildings5 occupy close to 10 percent of the building footprints within South Boston, they represent close to 15 percent of grade- level exposure within this neighborhood. (In East Boston, high-rise structures occupy less than 1 percent of the current building stock and just over 1 percent of grade-level exposure.) Though South Boston has a smaller number of buildings exposed to flooding under coastal storm events, it has more buildings and grade-level square footage exposed to high-tide flood events in the near term than in any other neighborhood, except Downtown. As a result, flood-related initiatives in South Boston, in the near term, might effectively focus on building- specific retrofits, though area-wide measures will be necessary over the long term to address high- tide flooding.
5High-rise buildings are defined for the purposes of this study as structures with greater than ten floors.
   SOUTH BOSTON BUILDING EXPOSURE
 292 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 293

 RISK TO THE ECONOMY
As of 2014, industries in South Boston contributed more than $20 billion in annual output (sales and revenues) to Boston’s economy. Legal, financial, real estate, and insurance industries made up more than half of that value and close to half of the neighborhood’s 78,000 jobs.
As soon as the 2070s, based on preliminary
and conservative-modeled6 evaluations, Boston could face close to $80 million in annualized lost output and close to 600 annualized lost jobs due to expected flood damage to structures in South Boston.7 This estimate includes interruption from businesses directly exposed to flood impacts, as well as the reverberations that impact may have throughout Suffolk County’s economy.8 Except
for the real estate industry, South Boston’s other top-producing industries—legal, financial, and insurance industries—are considered resilient industries. These industries often maintain secure data redundancies and are usually able to operate remotely or relocate operations quickly.
As in other neighborhoods, restaurants and retail are hit hard by flood impacts, representing over 30 percent of lost economic output and 50 percent of lost jobs from expected future flood conditions in the near term and later this century. Restaurants and retail establishments are often small businesses, and tend to employ low- to moderate- income personnel, which makes them important to considering impacts to socially vulnerable populations.
SOUTH BOSTON ECONOMIC LOSSES
Despite occupying a relatively small share of the South Boston economy and employment, restaurant and retail industries could be hardest hit by flood impacts in the near and long term. These industries are sensitive to residential and business activity within an area and must be local to operate.
South Boston’s top-producing industries are considered relatively resilient to disasters, as they are generally expected to have built-in system redundancies, data storage, and the capability to operate remotely.
6Economic loss calculations consider only impacts to floors expected to flood, only consider potential losses within the City (as opposed to regional or national losses), and assume all businesses eventually reopen. Please see the Appendix for a full list of assumptions.
7Expected flood damages are calculated for the 10%, 2%, 1%, and 0.1% annual chance flood events only.
8Losses to particular industries are based on current development and economic activity in the area, and considering that South Boston is in a period of intense growth, may differ as development continues.
 ECONOMIC RISK ASSUMPTIONS
Job and output loss includes direct, indirect, and induced consequences of flood impacts. Direct results are impacts felt within a neighborhood, while indirect and induced results are those expected to be felt throughout Suffolk County as a result
of changes in spending patterns. Results
for both job and output losses are the sum
of annualized values for the four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level
rise scenario. This represents a lower-bound estimate for several reasons. First, not all probabilistic events are considered. Second, the analysis assumes that all impacted businesses eventually reopen, though FEMA estimates that almost 40 percent of small businesses—and up to 25 percent of all businesses—never reopen after experiencing flood impacts. Third, only building areas directly impacted by floodwater are assumed to experience business interruption. This does not consider interruptions of businesses due to loss of power or utility functions. Finally, the analysis only considers existing populations, businesses, and buildings and does not include projections for future growth. Refer to the Appendix for a more detailed explanation of the exposure and consequence analysis.
  SOUTH BOSTON ANNUALIZED LOSSES
  INDUSTRY
  ANNUALIZED LOSS OF ECONOMIC OUTPUT
  Restaurants $150,000,000 Retail $9,700,000
    Real estate
Insurance and legal services
All remaining industries
Total
$4,000,000
$5,900,000 $44,500,000 $78,900,000
        294 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 295

  EXPECTED ANNUALIZED LOSSES TO STRUCTURES AND CONTENTS
36 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE AT 10%, 2%, 1%, 0.1% ANNUAL CHANCE COASTAL FLOOD EVENTS.
   SOUTH BOSTON ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
   296 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 297
Each circle represents annualized losses suffered by an individual building. Larger circle size indicates higher contents and structures losses. Annualized losses take into consideration the annual probability of an event occurring, as well as the projected impacts of such an event.
 Probable annualized losses are based on generalized assumptions, as opposed to site-specific assessment of structures. Site-specific evaluations of vulnerability are beyond the scope of this assessment and should be reserved for detailed evaluation of specific resilience initiatives or a next phase of this project.
 
SOUTH BOSTON
APPLICATION OF RESILIENCE INITIATIVES
PROTECTED SHORES
DEVELOP LOCAL CLIMATE RESILIENCE PLANS TO SUPPORT DISTRICT-SCALE CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The City should develop a local climate resilience plan for South Boston to support district-scale climate adaptation. The plan should include the following:
◦ Community engagement through a local climate resilience committee, leveraging existing local organizations and efforts.
◦ Land use planning for future flood protection systems, including Flood Protection Overlay Districts in strategically important “flood breach points” identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Flood protection feasibility studies, evaluating district-scale flood protection, including at locations identified below (see Potential Flood Protection Locations).
◦ Infrastructure adaptation planning through the Infrastructure Coordination Committee. For South Boston, the Massachusetts Port Authority (Massport) is a key partner because they control significant land and assets. Massport is currently working
with their tenants in South Boston to do operational preparedness planning.
◦ Coordination with other plans, including Imagine Boston 2030, GoBoston 2030, Special Planning Areas, and any updates to the South Boston Municipal Harbor Plan.
◦ Development of financing strategies and governance structures to support district-scale adaptation.
ESTABLISH FLOOD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS AND REQUIRE POTENTIAL INTEGRATION WITH FLOOD PROTECTION
The Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should petition the Boston Zoning Commission to create new Flood Protection Overlay Districts in areas that
are strategically important for potential future flood protection infrastructure (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below). Within a Flood Protection Overlay District, a developer would be required to submit a study of how a proposed project could be integrated into a future flood protection system; options may include raising and reinforcing the development site or providing room for a future easement across the site.
To reduce the risk of coastal flooding at major inundation points, the City should study the feasibility of constructing district-scale flood protection at the primary flood entry points in South Boston (see Potential Flood Protection Locations below for a preliminary identification of locations and potential benefits).
These feasibility studies should take place in the context of local climate resilience plans, featuring engagement with local community stakeholders, coordination with infrastructure adaptation, and considerations of how flood protection would impact or be impacted by neighborhood character and growth. Examples of prioritization criteria include the timing of flood risk, consequences for
people and economy, social equity, financial feasibility, and potential for additional benefits beyond flood risk reduction.
  PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT- SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
 298 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 299

 SLR SCENARIO
  DISTRICT SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD10
    POTENTIAL DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION LOCATIONS9
See the District-Scale Flood Protection Systems Overview section (p. 330) for a citywide perspective on district-scale flood protection. District-scale flood protection is only one piece of a multilayered solution that includes prepared and connected communities, resilient infrastructure, and adapted buildings.
Because the entire South Boston Waterfront is low lying, without high ground for a flood protection system to tie into, preventing inundation in this area is particularly challenging.
In the near term, district-scale flood protection is critical to address flood entry points around the entire edge of the
South Boston Waterfront, from Fort Point Channel to Boston Harbor and the Reserve Channel.
To prevent inundation from inland flood pathways, flood protection for the South Boston Waterfront will need to be combined with the following:
◦ Protection from flood pathways from Dorchester Bay expected during very low-probability events in the near term and high-probability events expected by the 2050s
◦ Protection at the New Charles River Dam, addressing potential overtopping or flanking of the dam expected for the 1 percent annual chance event later in the century
9” SLR (2030s–2050s)
21” SLR (2050s–2100s)
36” SLR
(2070s or later)
LOCATIONS
South Boston Waterfront
South Boston Waterfront and Dorchester Bay locations combined
South Boston Waterfront, Dorchester Bay, and the New Charles River Dam locations combined
      300 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 301
◦
The South Boston Waterfront location
focuses on flood entry points along the
edge of the district, including flooding from Fort Point Channel, Boston Harbor, and the Reserve Channel. The low-lying nature of
the South Boston Waterfront likely requires flood protection connections to high ground across Fort Point Channel. Potential flood protection solutions include a floodgate aimed at preventing storm surge from flowing into the South Boston Waterfront from Fort Point Channel. The gate could be placed at a number of locations, including the Northern Avenue Bridge, Seaport Boulevard Bridge, Congress Street Bridge, or Summer Street Bridge. The elevation of Summer Street on either side of the bridge is higher than the 1 percent annual chance flood event elevation with 36 inches of sea level rise (SLR), although other portions of Summer Street are lower. In addition to a gate across Fort Point Channel, flood protection solutions would require either a barrier
system to connect to high ground south of
Dorchester Bay
West Broadway, perimeter protection near the Reserve Channel, or a gate across the Reserve Channel. Deployable gates would be required at intersections. As an alternative to flood protection for the entire South Boston Waterfront, a flood protection system along the southwestern portion of the Fort Point Channel could provide flood protection benefits for parts of South Boston, as well as other areas, from Fort Point Channel flooding. However, since protection for the entire South Boston Waterfront would provide much greater benefit in both the near term and the
long term, this Fort Point Channel alternative is unlikely to be necessary. Flood entry points from the southwestern portion of the Fort Point Channel should still be considered among planning and redevelopment projects in the area and potentially addressed in order to provide multiple lines of flood protection for inland areas.
◦ The Dorchester Bay location, described in
the Dorchester focus area (see p.194), addresses flood pathways from the Old Harbor and Savin Hill Cove.
◦ The New Charles River Dam location, described in the Charles River and Downtown focus areas (see pp. 174, 216), addresses potential overtopping or flanking of the dam.
9These preliminary coastal flood protection concepts are based on a high-level analysis of existing topography, rights-of-way, and urban and environmental conditions. Important additional factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions and zoning as well
as any potential external impacts as a result of the project have not been studied in detail. As described in Initiatives 5-2 and 5-3 (see p.106,110), detailed feasibility studies, including appropriate public and stakeholder engagement, are required in order to better understand the costs and benefits of flood protection in each location.
10 Additional flood protection may be required for flood events more severe than the 1 percent annual chance flood. See Appendix for more detailed information on expected effectiveness of flood protection systems, including analysis of additional flood protection locations and flood frequencies.
DETAILED CONSIDERATIONS
◦ Significant near-term benefits within a single neighborhood: Given the South Boston Waterfront’s high level of exposure to coastal flooding, flood protection at this location would provide meaningful protection at 9 inches of SLR for the 1 percent annual chance event and more frequent events. In the near term, flooding expected from very low- probability events (0.1 percent annual chance) may require interventions at Dorchester Bay, though further analysis is required to confirm the nature of this risk.
◦ Need for multiple alignments in the second half of the century: In the mid-century, South Boston Waterfront protection may need to
be combined with Dorchester Bay protection to provide protection for South Boston, the South End, and Dorchester, due to flooding from the Boston Harbor, Fort Point Channel, the Reserve Channel, and Dorchester Bay. As soon as the 2070s, additional interventions at the New Charles River Dam will be necessary to protect the aforementioned neighborhoods from Charles River flooding expected at the 1 percent annual chance event.
New Charles River Dam
South Boston Waterfront
 
PREPARED & CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
CONDUCT AN OUTREACH CAMPAIGN TO PRIVATE FACILITIES THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS TO ENSURE THAT THEY ENGAGE IN EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND ADAPTATION PLANNING
EXPAND BOSTON’S SMALL BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
The City should conduct outreach to managers of facilities in South Boston that serve significant concentrations
of vulnerable populations and are not required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans under current regulations. Targeted facilities will include affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation centers, daycare facilities, food pantries, small nonprofit offices, and others. Illustrative examples
of the types of facilities to which the City might conduct outreach include the Tiny Tots daycare facility on Columbia Road, the Harborview Children’s Center, Bright Horizons at Seaport, and South Boston Head Start. These facilities are exposed to near-term damage from sea level rise and coastal flooding or can expect access issues related to near-term stormwater flooding.
The City should reach out to small businesses in South Boston exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term or coastal flooding under a 1 percent annual chance event at 9 inches of SLR to help them develop business continuity plans, evaluate insurance coverage needs, and identify low-cost physical adaptations. Under a 1 percent annual chance event at 9 inches of SLR, 88 commercial buildings and 131 mixed-use buildings that could host small businesses are exposed to flood risk. Though South Boston’s primary commercial corridor along Broadway
is located along high ground and is not exposed to flooding under the 1 percent annual chance event even with 36 inches of SLR, substantial numbers of small businesses in City Point, Telegraph Hill, and the South Boston Waterfront adjacent to new office developments are exposed under 9 inches of SLR.
11The City did not review the extent of existing preparedness planning as part of this study.
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
ESTABLISH INFRASTRUCTURE COORDINATION COMMITTEE
The Infrastructure Coordination Committee (ICC) should support coordinated adaptation planning for South Boston’s
key infrastructure systems, including energy, transportation, water and sewer, and environmental assets. The City should support the MBTA in conducting a full asset-level vulnerability assessment of its system, including the Red Line and Silver Line. Though neither of South Boston’s two Red Line stops (Broadway and Andrew) are exposed to coastal flooding at 9 inches of
SLR under the 1 percent annual chance flood event, flooding of tunnels and stops in Downtown Boston could impede the ability of residents to access jobs and essential services. The Silver Line has significant exposure to flooding at 9 inches of SLR under the 1 percent annual chance flood event
The Office of Emergency Management should work with the Boston Transportation Department, Department of Public Works, and private utilities to provide guidance on critical roads to prioritize for adaptation planning, including evacuation routes and roads required to restore or maintain critical services. South Boston has four evacuation routes that are exposed at 9 inches
of SLR under the 1 percent annual chance flood event, including Haul Road, Summer Street, Ted Williams Tunnel, and Congress Street. It is important to prepare roads in South Boston to avoid islanding in the later century.
The 2016 Boston Community Energy Study identified East Broadway near Emerson Street as a potential location for an emergency microgrid, based on its concentration of critical facilities. The Environment Department will work with local stakeholders and utility providers to explore this location. The site is not exposed to expected coastal storm impacts in this century. The City also has been exploring the opportunity for a pilot microgrid project at Ray Flynn Marine Park. The proposed site is significantly exposed to coastal and stormwater flooding in the near term, and the City should consider climate change impacts in its planning process.
  PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT- SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
  CONDUCT FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
 302 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 303

ADAPTED BUILDINGS
PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS FOR PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
Upon amending the zoning code to support climate readiness (see Initiative 9-2, p.135), the Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should immediately notify all developers with projects in the development pipeline in the future floodplain that they may alter their plans in a manner consistent with the zoning amendments (e.g., elevating their first-floor ceilings without violating building height limits), without needing to restart the BPDA permitting process.
The South Boston Waterfront is one of the most active development locations in Boston. Currently, 91 residential and 34 commercial buildings are under construction or permitted in South Boston, representing 3,900 additional housing units and 1.4 million square feet of new commercial space. In addition, General Electric is building a new headquarters facility adjacent to Fort Point Channel, the Massachusetts Convention and Exhibition Center has been proposed for expansion, and the Massachusetts Port Authority is offering a 23-acre site for development in the Massport Marine Terminal, making it critical to focus on building resilience now.
The Boston Planning and Development Agency should incorporate future climate considerations (long-term projections for extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding) into major planning efforts in South Boston. The City and state are funding a $100 million redesign and reconstruction of the Northern Avenue Bridge. In addition, the state is dedicating $25 million to improve pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure in South Boston and considering building an underground tunnel for buses at D Street. The City is currently leading a planning effort for the Dorchester Avenue Corridor between the Andrew and Broadway MBTA Stations. The City also is pursuing implementation of the 100 Acres Plan, completed in 2006.
ESTABLISH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS, SUPPORTED BY A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate risks and actions they can undertake to plan for these risks. To address the most immediate risks, the City should prioritize audits for buildings with at least a 1 percent annual chance of exposure to coastal and riverine flooding in the near term, under 9 inches of sea level rise. In South Boston, this includes 353 structures, with 41 percent of these consisting of residential and mixed-use buildings that house residents. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost-effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements.
The Office of Budget Management should work with City departments to prioritize upgrades to municipal facilities in South Boston that demonstrate high levels
of vulnerability (in terms of the timing and extent of exposure), consequences of partial or full failure, and criticality (with highest priority for impacts on life and safety) from coastal flooding in the near term. In the near term, at 9 inches of SLR, the EMS Harbor Unit, Boston Police Department Harbor Patrol Unit, and the Boston Marine Industrial Park, which is owned by the BRA, are exposed under the 1 percent annual chance flood event. In addition, the Boston Housing Authority Old Colony, Mary Ellen McCormack, and West Ninth Street housing developments will be exposed to coastal flooding in the second half of the century.
   INCORPORATE FUTURE CLIMATE CONDITIONS INTO AREA PLANS AND ZONING AMENDMENTS
PREPARE MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
 304 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 305

ESTABLISH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS, SUPPORTED BY A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM.
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate-related risks, and actions they can undertake to address these risks. To address the most immediate risks, the City should prioritize audits for buildings with at least a one percent annual chance
of exposure to coastal and riverine flooding in the near term, under nine inches of sea level rise. In South Boston, this includes 353 structures, with 41% of these consisting of residential and mixed-use buildings that house residents.
A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost-effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage.
The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements.
 306 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 307

South End
The South End is located to the southwest of Fort Point Channel, southeast of the Back Bay neighborhood, and north of Roxbury and Dorchester.
The South End was built on fill starting in 1849. Washington Street, which extends through the South End, was the original street connecting Boston (the Shawmut Peninsula) to Roxbury, along the narrow “Great Neck.” The South End was designed to be a residential district for upper- middle-class households, with brick row houses organized around small parks, to relieve housing pressures in Downtown and Beacon Hill. The majority of the construction occurred between 1850 and 1880. With the development of the Back Bay in the 1880s, the South End experienced new competition for upper-middle-class households.
During the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century, the South End received an influx of working-class immigrants. In the early 1900s,
the Washington Street Elevated rail line opened, running from Chinatown to Dudley Square and then ultimately to Forest Hills.
During the 1960s and 1970s, the area became subject to urban renewal efforts. The state acquired land along a 4.6-mile route in the South End, Roxbury, and Jamaica Plain, with the intent of building a new section of I-95 (the Southwest Expressway) into Downtown Boston along the former Penn Central/New Haven Railroad right- of-way. Community protests caused the project
to be halted. From 1979 to 1987, the land was
used to reroute the MBTA Orange Line, and the Southwest Corridor Park was constructed on top. The Washington Street Elevated rail line, the last remaining elevated section of the Orange Line, was subsequently removed.
With the construction of the Prudential Center tower in 1964 and the Copley Place retail, office, and hotel complex in 1983, market pressures started to bleed over into the South End. The neighborhood experienced reinvestment from the 1970s onward, intensifying over time. Reflecting market pressures, the neighborhood has been
the site of several innovative projects to preserve affordable housing. The Villa Victoria project, consisting of 435 low-income housing units, was completed during the 1970s, by the Inquilinos Boricuas en Acción community development corporation, using land provided by the Boston Redevelopment Authority. The Tent City project, consisting of 269 units of mixed-income housing, was completed in 1988, on land originally planned for a parking garage.
Today, the South End remains a primarily residential neighborhood. The housing stock consists of historic brick row houses, several public housing developments, and some infill, including the recent Ink Block project, a reuse
of the Boston Herald site. The South End has main commercial corridors on Tremont Street, Columbus Avenue, and Washington Street,
the last of which is a Main Streets district. The neighborhood has major employment hubs at the Boston Medical Center and Boston University School of Medicine and has experienced an expansion of biotech light manufacturing. The area is primarily served by the Orange Line, as well as the Silver Line, which opened in 2002 and runs along Washington Street and connects Downtown Crossing to Dudley Square.
  Image courtesy of Sasaki
308 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston Focus Areas 309
CC Image courtesy of pacoseoaneperez on Flickr

FLOOD PROGRESSION
The South End is exposed to climate change impacts including heat, increased precipitation
and stormwater flooding, and sea level rise and coastal and riverine flooding. Exposure to heat and stormwater flooding are addressed in the Citywide Vulnerability Assessment (see p.12), while exposure and consequences to coastal and riverine flood risk are further discussed in this section.
The South End will have
limited exposure to coastal flooding until the second half of the century, when very low- probability coastal storms occur (0.1 percent annual chance event). Exposure to these storms and the 1 percent annual chance event later in the century is significant due to a flood pathway through Fort Point Channel. Flooding is expected to be severe enough to flood portions of Roxbury.
9 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
 DEFINITIONS
Near term: Beginning 2030s, assumes 9 inches of sea level rise
Midterm: Beginning 2050s, assumes 21 inches of sea level rise
Long term: Beginning 2070s or later, assumes 36 inches of sea level rise
Exposure: Can refer to people, buildings, infrastructure, and other resources within areas likely to experience hazard impacts. Does not consider conditions that may prevent or limit impacts.
Vulnerability: Refers to how and why people or assets can be affected by a hazard. Requires site-specific information.
Consequence: Illustrates to what extent people or assets can be expected to
be affected by a hazard, as a result of vulnerability and exposure. Consequences can often be communicated in terms of economic losses.
Annualized losses: The sum of the probability-weighted losses for all four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level rise scenario. Probability-weighted losses are the losses for a single event times the probability of that event occurring in a given year.
*For a full list of definitions, refer to the Glossary in the Appendix.
21 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
LEGEND
  310 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
36 INCHES SEA LEVEL RISE
Focus Areas 311
     
Until the middle of the century, the South End
is expected to have limited exposure to coastal flooding. Flooding originates from the coast through relatively narrow and few penetration points. Nevertheless, a topographic threshold
is expected to be breached as a result of coastal storms later in the century. In this case, the topographic threshold refers to the point at which water overtops grade and descends into lower topography to inundate a large area of typically dry land. This threshold exists at the railroad crossing on the western side of Fort Point Channel1 and will expose vast areas of the South End and some northern reaches of Roxbury as soon as the 2070s. Over 70 percent (450 acres) of the South
End neighborhood alone will be exposed to low- probability flood events during this time period.
Though not as significant of a flood pathway
as Fort Point Channel, there is some potential for flooding from Dorchester Bay through Joseph Moakley Park as soon as the 2070s. The topography around Joseph Moakley Park and I-93 is continuously low lying, potentially allowing floodwaters to propagate inland to the South
End and Roxbury for coastal storm events with lower probability of occurrence (1 percent annual chance). This is particularly the case for long- duration events, like nor’easters.
Resilience planning must consider that the primary flood pathway for the South End is through Fort Point Channel. Opportunities may exist for flood protections that defend the South End and Roxbury, while also benefiting South Boston and Downtown.
 Of all Boston focus areas, the South End has the greatest percentage of land area per neighborhood exposed to low-probability storms expected by the end of the century.
1MassDOT FHWA Report citation: Bosma, Kirk, et. al. “MassDOT-FHWA Pilot Project Report: Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessments and Adaptation Options for the Central Artery.” Jun. 2015, https://www.massdot.state.ma.us/Portals/8/docs/ environmental/SustainabilityEMS/Pilot_Project_Report_MassDOT_FHWA.pdf.
312 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 313

EXPOSURE
POPULATION & INFRASTRUCTURE
SOUTH END POPULATION EXPOSURE
POPULATION AND SOCIAL VULNERABILITY
The South End is home to 38,600 people. While the South End boasts high residential real estate values and is generally considered an affluent area, it is home to more than 11,600 low-to no-income residents, 30 percent of the neighborhood population (higher than Boston’s
28 percent average). Vulnerable populations in the South End are mostly concentrated in its more than 3,300 units of subsidized and public housing developments. The following public housing developments in the South End have at least some portion exposed to low-probability flood impacts later in the century: Cathedral, Torre Unidad, West Newton, Rutland, Frederick Douglas, Washington Manor, Hampton House, Camden, and Lenox. Together, they make up almost half of the South End’s public housing stock.
As soon as the 2070s, almost 70 percent of the South End’s population, 27,000 residents, will be exposed to flooding under low-probability events (1 percent annual chance).
Over 4,700 South End residents are expected to require shelter for this scenario. Current shelter capacity in
the South End is 250 people. The South End’s shelter capacity is likely to be further reduced in the case
of a flood event. In the late century, the Blackstone Community Center and McKinley Elementary
School, which serve as emergency shelters for the neighborhood, will be exposed to flooding from high-probability events, potentially reducing the neighborhood’s current shelter capacity by more than 60 percent. There are two emergency shelters in the northern portion of Roxbury, which are not expected to be exposed to flood impacts and may be able to shelter residents from South End and South Boston, as needed.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Late in the century, the South End’s major roads and evacuation routes, in addition to the Orange and Silver Line routes
in the neighborhood, will be exposed
to flooding, potentially compromising connectivity between Downtown and inland neighborhoods.
As soon as the 2050s, portions of the Orange Line routes through the South End will be exposed to flooding from low-probability events (1 percent annual chance); high-probability events expected later in the century (10 percent annual chance) will expose large sections of the Silver Line that run through the South End. The MBTA’s Albany Street Garage is also exposed to flood impacts from low- probability events expected later in the century, which may affect the bus fleet that serves local routes, Mass Pike Express routes, and crosstown routes. These potential transportation impacts could hinder evacuation and disaster response operations in not only the South End but also in Downtown and South Boston. In the longer term, extended repairs to these systems could disrupt commutes back into these two economic centers.
Furthermore, important transportation corridors in the South End, including Tremont Street, Massachusetts Avenue, Albany Street, I-93 South, and Melnea Cass Boulevard at the border with Roxbury, all will have some portion exposed to flood impacts from high-probability flood events (10 percent annual chance) later in the century.
Boston Water and Sewer Commission operations depend upon uninterrupted power service in the South End and northern Roxbury areas.
In the South End, the Union Park pump station also may be exposed to high-probability flood impacts later in the century (10 percent annual chance event). The pump station is a combined sewer facility and has redundant pumps and generators in place to cover both mechanical and electrical failures, should they occur.
The South End may experience reduced emergency response capacity later in the century.
Throughout the South End, the EMS Headquarters, one Boston Police station, and two of three fire stations will be exposed to high-probability flood events as soon as the 2070s (10 percent annual chance). Widespread exposure in the area will also impact roads and complicate traveling for response vehicles, as described above.
Some of the area’s top economic industries, the Boston Medical Center and Boston University Medical Campus, will be exposed to late-century flooding.
In the late century, the entire Boston Medical Center and Boston University Medical campus could be exposed to flood impacts, including the Menino Pavilion. The emergency room at the Menino Pavilion has the greatest volume of any trauma program in the Northeast, with more than 100,000 patients treated each year.2 Full or partial service interruption at Boston Medical Center will likely have an effect on the nearest emergency medical facilities, including New England Baptist Hospital (which has announced that it is planning to relocate) or the VA Hospital, both in Mission Hill, as they endure the surge of relocated and redirected patients.3
  2 Source: Boston University. “The Menino Pavilion – Boston Medical Center.” Website. Accessed August 2016. http://www.bumc.bu.edu/ surgery/miscellani/bmc-menino-pavilion/
3 A site-specific review of the Boston Medical Center is necessary.
314 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 315

EXPOSURE AND CONSEQUENCES
BUILDINGS AND ECONOMY
RISK TO BUILDINGS
Residential buildings located along Chandler Street are mostly split-level, three-story row houses and could experience significant flooding once waters are high enough to reach above grade.
In the near term, approximately 50 buildings in the South End are at risk to very low-probability, yet severe, coastal storms (0.1 percent annual chance event). The first structures expected to
be impacted are located along Chandler Street, east of Clarendon, as well as just north of the Massachusetts Turnpike adjacent to Frieda Garcia Park. As soon as the 2050s, broad swaths of the South End neighborhood can be expected to be exposed to coastal flooding for the same event scenario.
The South End is in the top three exposed focus areas in Boston toward the end of the century, with close to $200 million in annualized structure damage and related losses possible.
As soon as the 2070s, high-probability coastal flood events (10 percent annual chance) may impact
over 3,000 structures in the South End. The South End is also expected to experience the highest average flood depth inside structures citywide for the 1 percent annual chance flood event in the late century. The scale of loss to coastal flood impacts could potentially be mitigated through relatively inexpensive and focused projects to cut off flooding into the low-lying areas of the community.
.
SOUTH END BUILDING EXPOSURE
   SOUTH END MARKET VALUE EXPOSURE
 316 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
   Image courtesy of Sasaki
Focus Areas 317

 RISK TO ECONOMY
The South End alone currently contributes over 20,000 jobs and $3.6 billion in output to the city’s annual economy. Healthcare is the top industry in terms of both employment and output. Economic impacts to the communities are expected to be light until later in the century, when the topographic threshold described above is breached. As soon as the 2070s, unmitigated flood impacts could yield annualized output loss in excess of $60 million and annualized job loss around 330. The top affected industries at that point are expected to be real estate (due to the large areas of residential property impacted), hospitals, and restaurants. Restaurants are expected to experience the largest job impacts as a result of flooding late in the century.
Though flooding originates from the
coast through relatively narrow and
few penetration points, a topographic threshold is expected to be breached sometime mid- to late century as a result of coastal storms. This would lead to over $200 million in annualized expected direct physical damage to structures and their contents late in the century.
SOUTH END ECONOMIC LOSSES
South End could experience the deepest average flood depth to flooded structures late in the century if flood risk goes unmitigated (1 percent annual chance flood event).
 ECONOMIC RISK ASSUMPTIONS
Job and output loss includes direct, indirect, and induced consequences of flood impacts. Direct results are impacts felt within a neighborhood, while indirect and induced results are those expected to be felt throughout Suffolk County as a result
of changes in spending patterns. Results
for both job and output losses are the sum
of annualized values for the four flood frequencies analyzed for each sea level
rise scenario. This represents a lower-bound estimate for several reasons. First, not all probabilistic events are considered. Second, the analysis assumes that all impacted businesses eventually reopen, though FEMA estimates that almost 40 percent of small businesses—and up to 25 percent of all businesses—never reopen after experiencing flood impacts. Third, only building areas directly impacted by floodwater are assumed to experience business interruption. This does not consider interruptions of businesses due to loss of power or utility functions. Finally, the analysis only considers existing populations, businesses, and buildings and does not include projections for future growth. Refer to the Appendix for a more detailed explanation of the exposure and consequence analysis.
  SOUTH END ANNUALIZED LOSSES
  INDUSTRY
  ANNUALIZED LOSS OF ECONOMIC OUTPUT
  Real estate
Restaurants
Hospitals and other medical facilities
Wholesale trade and retail
All other industries
Total
$12,100,000 $5,800,000 $7,600,000 $1,700,000 $36,100,000 $61,600,000
            318 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 319

   EXPECTED ANNUALIZED LOSSES TO STRUCTURES AND CONTENTS
36 INCHES OF SEA LEVEL RISE AT 10%, 2%, 1%, 0.1% ANNUAL CHANCE COASTAL FLOOD EVENTS.
  SOUTH END ANNUALIZED LOSSES
36 INCH SEA LEVEL RISE CONDITION
   320 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 321
Each circle represents annualized losses suffered by an individual building. Larger circle size indicates higher contents and structures losses. Annualized losses take into consideration the annual probability of an event occurring, as well as the projected impacts of such an event.
 Probable annualized losses are based on generalized assumptions, as opposed to site-specific assessment of structures. Site-specific evaluations of vulnerability are beyond the scope of this assessment and should be reserved for detailed evaluation of specific resilience initiatives or a next phase of this project.
 
SOUTH END
APPLICATION OF RESILIENCE INITIATIVES
PROTECTED SHORES
PRIORITIZE AND STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF DISTRICT- SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION
To reduce the risk of coastal flooding at major inundation points, the City should study the feasibility of constructing district-scale flood protection at the primary flood entry points for the South End (see Potential
Flood Protection Locations below for a preliminary identification of locations and potential benefits). As described below, flood protection systems that would benefit the South End would likely be located outside of the South End, in South Boston, Dorchester, and by the New Charles River Dam.
These feasibility studies should feature engagement with local community stakeholders, coordination
with infrastructure adaptation, and considerations of how flood protection would impact or be impacted
by neighborhood character and growth. Examples of prioritization criteria include the timing of flood risk, consequences for people and economy, social equity, financial feasibility, and potential for additional benefits beyond flood risk reduction.
POTENTIAL DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION LOCATIONS4
See District-Scale Flood Protection Systems section for a citywide perspective on district-scale flood protection. District-scale
flood protection is only one piece of a multi-layered solution
that includes prepared and connected communities, resilient infrastructure, and adapted buildings.
4 These preliminary coastal flood protection concepts are based on a high-level analysis of existing topography, rights-of-way, and urban and environmental conditions. Important additional factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions, zoning, as well
as any potential external impacts as a result of the project have not been studied in detail. As described in Initiatives 5-2 and 5-3, detailed feasibility studies, including appropriate public and stakeholder engagement, are required in order to better understand the costs and benefits of flood protection in each location.
In the near term, coastal flood risk in the South End is modest and likely does not require district-scale flood protection.
Later in the century, the South End
will be exposed to flooding from Fort Point Channel and other inland flood pathways, so combined flood protection at multiple locations will be critical:
◦ At Dorchester Bay, addressing inland flood pathways originating from the Old Harbor and Savin Hill Cove.
◦ At the South Boston Waterfront, addressing inland flood pathways originating from Fort Point Channel, Boston Harbor, and the Reserve Channel
◦ At the New Charles River Dam, addressing potential overtopping or flanking of the dam.
9” SLR (2030s–2050s)
21” SLR (2050s–2100s)
36” SLR
(2070s or later)
None6
The South Boston Waterfront and Dorchester Bay locations combined
The New Charles River Dam, South Boston Waterfront, and Dorchester Bay locations combined
  SLR SCENARIO
  DISTRICT SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD5
       5Additional flood protection may be required for flood events more severe than the 1 percent annual chance flood. See Appendix for more detailed information on expected effectiveness of flood protection systems, including analysis of additional flood protection locations and flood frequencies.
6 Benefits of district-scale flood protection would be modest.
  322 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 323
New Charles River Dam
South Boston Waterfront
 Dorchester Bay
 
 LOCATIONS
◦ The South Boston Waterfront location, ◦ described in the South Boston focus area (see
p.282), addresses flood entry points along the
edge of the district. As an alternative to flood protection for the entire South Boston Waterfront,
a flood protection system along the southwestern portion of the Fort Point Channel could provide flood protection benefits for parts of South Boston, as well as other areas, from Fort Point Channel flooding. However, since protection for the entire South Boston Waterfront would provide much greater benefit in both the near term and the
long term, this Fort Point Channel alternative is unlikely to be necessary. Flood entry points from the southwestern portion of the Fort Point Channel should still be considered among planning and redevelopment projects in the area and potentially addressed in order to provide multiple lines of flood protection for inland areas.
◦ The Dorchester Bay location, described in the Dorchester focus area (see p.194), addresses
flood pathways from the Old Harbor and
Savin Hill Cove. ◦
◦ The New Charles River Dam location, described in the Charles River and Downtown focus areas (see pp. 174, 216), addresses potential overtopping or flanking of the dam.
PREPARED & CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
CONDUCT AN OUTREACH CAMPAIGN TO PRIVATE FACILITIES THAT SERVE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS TO ENSURE THAT THEY ENGAGE IN EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND ADAPTATION PLANNING
In the long term, the City should conduct outreach
to managers of facilities in the South End that serve significant concentrations of vulnerable populations and are not required to have operational preparedness and evacuation plans under current regulations. Targeted facilities will include affordable housing complexes, substance abuse treatment centers, daycare facilities,
food pantries, small nonprofit offices, and others. The City should conduct outreach in the long term because widespread flooding in the neighborhood is not expected for the 1 percent annual chance flood event until later
in the century, meaning that the South End focus area has a longer adaptation window. Illustrative examples
of the types of facilities to which the City might conduct outreach include the Ellis Memorial Early Education and Care Program, Eagle’s Nest Learning Center, and Pine Village Preschool. These facilities will be exposed to long- term damage from sea level rise and coastal flooding or can expect access issues related to stormwater flooding in the same time frame.
7The City did not review the extent of existing preparedness planning as part of this study.
324 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 325
DETAILED CONSIDERATIONS
Multiple locations required to address flood risk: For very low-probability events (0.1 percent annual chance) in the near term and into the second half of the century, flood exposure from both Fort Point Channel and Dorchester Bay are expected to impact portions of the South End, requiring district-scale flood protection solutions. Later in the century, flood protection solutions at the South Boston Waterfront and Dorchester Bay may not be independently effective for the 1 percent annual chance event and events with
lower probability of occurrence, requiring interventions at the New Charles River Dam to impede flooding from the Charles River. While investments at all three locations may be significant, losses avoided are expected to be substantial because an integrated system could protect Downtown, South Boston, Dorchester, the South End, Roxbury, and neighborhoods along the Charles River.

PREPARED & CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
EXPAND BOSTON’S SMALL BUSINESS PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
The City should reach out to small businesses in South Boston exposed to stormwater flooding risk in the near term to help them develop business continuity plans, evaluate additional insurance coverage needs, and identify low-cost physical adaptations. In the South End, there are approximately 30 commercial buildings and 180 mixed-
use buildings that could host small businesses exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term. It is important to note that, in the near term, Tremont Street and Massachusetts Avenue, which are both key commercial corridors, will be exposed to stormwater flooding. The Washington Gateway Main Street District will also have portions exposed to stormwater flooding in the near term and will be exposed to coastal storm and sea level rise impacts during high- probability storms later in the century.
RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE
ESTABLISH INFRASTRUCTURE COORDINATION COMMITTEE
PROVIDE GUIDANCE ON PRIORITY EVACUATION
AND SERVICE ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE ICC
The Infrastructure Coordination Committee (ICC) should support coordinated adaptation planning for the South End’s key infrastructure systems, including transportation, water and sewer, energy, telecommunications, and environmental assets. In the near term, the City should support the MBTA in conducting a full asset-level vulnerability assessment of its system.
The Office of Emergency Management should work with the Boston Transportation Department, Department of Public Works, and private utilities to provide guidance
on critical roads to prioritize for adaptation planning, including evacuation routes and roads required to restore or maintain critical services. With 21 inches of sea level rise, under the 1 percent annual chance flood event, portions of I-93 near Tremont Street, Arlington Street, and Berkeley Street will be exposed to coastal and riverine flooding.
The 2016 Boston Community Energy Study identified three potential locations for Energy Justice or emergency microgrids: along Massachusetts Avenue, along Tremont Street, and at Public Alley 706. The Environment Department should work with local stakeholders and utility providers to explore these locations. All three locations have significant exposure to flooding under the 1 percent annual chance event with 36 inches of SLR.
   CONDUCT FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR COMMUNITY ENERGY SOLUTIONS
 326 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 327

ADAPTED BUILDINGS
PROMOTE CLIMATE READINESS FOR PROJECTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
INCORPORATE FUTURE CLIMATE CONDITIONS INTO AREA PLANS AND ZONING AMENDMENTS
ESTABLISH A CLIMATE READY BUILDINGS EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR PROPERTY OWNERS AND ESTABLISH A RESILIENCE AUDIT PROGRAM
Upon amending the zoning code to support climate readiness (see Initiative 9-2, p.135), the Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA) should immediately notify all developers with projects in the development pipeline in the future floodplain that they may alter their plans in a manner consistent with the zoning amendments (e.g., elevating their first-floor ceilings without violating building height limits), without needing to restart the BPDA permitting process.
The Boston Planning and Development Agency should incorporate future climate considerations (long-term projections for extreme heat, stormwater flooding, and coastal and riverine flooding) into major planning efforts in the South End.
The City should develop and run a Climate Ready Buildings Education Program and a resilience audit program to inform property owners about their current and future climate risks and actions they can undertake
to address these risks. A resilience audit should help property owners identify cost-effective, building-specific improvements to reduce flood risk, such as backflow preventers, elevation of critical equipment, and deployable flood barriers; promote interventions that address stormwater runoff or the urban heat island effect, such as green roofs or “cool roofs” that reflect heat; and encourage owners to develop operational preparedness plans and secure appropriate insurance coverage. The resilience audit program should include a combination of mandatory and voluntary, market-based and subsidized elements.
PREPARE MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
The Office of Budget Management should work with City departments to prioritize upgrades to municipal facilities in South End that demonstrate high levels of vulnerability (in terms of the timing and extent of exposure), consequences of partial or full failure, and criticality (with highest priority for impacts on life and safety) from coastal flooding in the near term. Later in the century, there are a number of Boston Housing Authority developments that are expected to be exposed to coastal flooding, as well as access issues related to stormwater flooding. These sites include Camden, Cathedral, Frederick Douglas, Hampton House, Lenox, Rutland/West Newton, Torre Unidad, and Washington Manor. The City will also prioritize adding backup power to emergency shelters that do not yet have power system redundancies. By later in the century, there will be a strong need for shelter capacity in the South
End unless flood risk is mitigated, which will require all existing shelters to be prepared.
    328 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 329

District-Scale Flood Protection Systems
A CITYWIDE PERSPECTIVE
Based on the citywide vulnerability assessment
and the focus-area analyses, Climate Ready Boston proposes nine locations
for flood-protection interventions. As sea level rises over the century, the number of interventions needed increases, and their cumulative effectiveness becomes more important.
KEY FINDINGS
The Progression of Flood Protection
In the near term, with nine inches of sea level rise, four flood protection systems, independent of one another, could protect against widespread one percent annual chance flooding: East Boston; the New Charles River Dam; the Downtown Waterfront; and the South Boston Waterfront.
As sea level rise progresses to 36 inches (2070s or later), preventing one percent annual chance flooding would require additional interventions:
◦ An expansion of the East Boston flood protection system;
◦ A Charlestown system near Sullivan Square;
◦ A Downtown Waterfront system; and
◦ A combined flood protection system for
the New Charles River Dam, the South Boston Waterfront, and Dorchester Bay. This combined system will become necessary because low-lying inland areas and below- grade roads can bring floodwaters from the waterfront across the city.
1 Important factors, including existing drainage systems, underground transportation and utility structures, soil conditions, zoning, as well as any potential external impacts as a result of the project have not been studied in detail.
2 See Appendix for more detailed information on expected effectiveness of flood protection systems, including analysis of additional flood protection locations and flood frequencies.
3 Annualized benefits can be used to determine project cost effectiveness by applying a discount rate to benefits, capital costs, and maintenance costs over
the expected project useful life and evaluating the ratio of the net present value
of benefits over costs. A ratio of one or greater typically indicates that a project
is cost effective. A ratio less than one, for an evaluation that is based entirely on avoided damage costs, does not necessarily mean that a project is not worthwhile. Cost effectiveness is one lens through which to evaluate the merits of a project. These estimates consider current resident and structures in the study area, not future growth. For methodology see Appendix.
The Locations of Flood Protection
◦ A flood protection system that addresses the overtopping or flanking of the New Charles River Dam can reduce flood risk Downtown, in Charlestown, and along both sides of the Charles River.
◦ In East Boston and in Charlestown, targeted flood protection systems can address relatively narrow flood pathways.
◦ The low-lying portion of the Downtown Waterfront is very broad and densely built, which makes it challenging to identify a specific location for a flood protection system.
◦ Nearly the entire South Boston Waterfront is low-lying and exposed to flooding from three edges, presenting significant challenges to a flood protection system. A system that prevents flooding from Fort Point Channel can also benefit areas as far inland as the South End, Roxbury, Newmarket, and Widett Circle.
◦ Along Dorchester Bay, The broad, low-lying waterfront areas from Joseph Moakley Park to Savin Hill Cove also expose inland areas to flooding but do not present obvious, targeted solutions for flood protection systems.
 Methodology
Based on existing topography, rights- of-way, and urban and environmental conditions, Climate Ready Boston identified locations where green or gray flood protection systems could protect populations and reduce damage to buildings, infrastructure, and the economy from the projected one percent annual flooding. This analysis is preliminary. As described
in Initiatives 5-2 and 5-3, detailed feasibility studies and public and stakeholder engagement are required to better understand the costs and benefits of flood protection in each location.1
The three maps and accompanying tables on the following pages correspond to the three levels of
sea level rise—9, 21, and 36 inches— assessed in this report. There are 9 potential intervention areas, described in more detail in the various focus
area sections.2 The accompanying tables provide preliminary, order- of-magnitude estimates of certain benefits3 that could result from the implementation of the flood protection systems. They do not estimate
potential costs.
This set of potential locations for district-scale flood protection is
not comprehensive, and additional infrastructure may be necessary to protect specific sites. Additionally, district-scale flood protection is
only one piece of a multi-layered solution that includes prepared and connected communities, resilient infrastructure, and adapted buildings.
  330 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 331

9 INCHES SLR (2030–2050S)
DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD
Jeffries Point to Central Square
(See East Boston Focus Area for more information)
Downtown Waterfront
(See Downtown Focus Area for more information)
                                              New Charles River Dam
Downtown Waterfront
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area4
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities5
New Charles River Dam
10,700
1,580
260 acres
$186 million
$6 million
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area6
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities7
South Boston Waterfront
1,100
170
40 acres
$219 million
$21 million
                 (See Downtown and Charlestown Focus Areas for more information)
(See South Boston Focus Area for more information)
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area8
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities9
1,500
110
90 acres
$314 million
$13 million
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area10
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities11
2,300
290
320 acres
$978 billion
$62 million
                                                            332 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 333
Jeffries Point to Central Square
South Boston Waterfront
 4 Area protected through the 1% annual chance flood event. Additional flood protection would be necessary to protect against the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
5 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events. Additional flood protection locations would be necessary to protect against the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
6 Area protected through the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
7 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1%, 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events.
8 Area protected through the 1% annual chance flood event. Additional flood protection would be necessary to protect against the 0.1% annual chance flood
9 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events. Additional flood protection would be necessary to protect against the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
10 Area protected through the 1% annual chance flood event. Additional flood protection would be necessary to protect against the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
11 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events. Additional flood protection locations would be necessary to protect against the 0.1% annual chance flood event.

21 INCHES SLR (2050S–2100S)
DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD
Jeffries Point to Central Square
(See East Boston Focus Area for more information)
Orient Heights
(See East Boston Focus Area for more information)
   North Charlestown
Orient Heights
Wood Island
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area12
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities13
10,500
1,560
270 acres
$541 million
$36 million
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area14
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities15
Downtown Waterfront
2,700
470
120 acres
$227 million
$23 million
                                             Downtown Waterfront
Porzio Park
              North Charlestown and New Charles River Dam Locations Combined16
(See East Boston Focus Area for more information)
(See Downtown Boston Focus Area for more information)
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area17
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities18
21,200
4,310
140 acres
$103 million
$3 million
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area19
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities20
1,100
200
50 acres
$383 million
$39 million
                                                            334 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 335
Jeffries Point to Central Square
 12Area protected through the 1% annual chance flood event. Additional flood protection would be necessary to protect against the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
13Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events. Additional flood protection locations would be necessary to protect against the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
16
Only includes benefits in Charlestown. See table for New Charles River Dam for additional benefits citywide.
Area protected through the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
15 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1%, 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events.
17Area protected through the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
18Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1%, 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events.
19Area protected through the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
20 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1%, 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events.
14

21 INCHES SLR (2050S–2100S)
DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD
 New Charles River Dam
 South Boston Waterfront
  Dorchester Bay
New Charles River Dam21
(See Downtown and Charlestown Focus Areas for more information)
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area22
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities23
South Boston Waterfront and
Dorchester Bay Locations Combined
(See South Boston and Dorchester Bay Focus Areas for more information)
  23,600
4,360
290 acres
$543 million
$24 million
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area24
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities25
41,700
4,990
1,580 acres
$3 billion
$218 million
                                                          336 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Focus Areas 337
21Does not include benefits in Charlestown, which are dependent on flood protection in North Charlestown. See table for North Charlestown and New Charles River Dam Locations Combined.
22Area protected through the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
23Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1%, 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events.
24Area protected through the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
25Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1%, 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events.

36 INCHES SLR (2070S OR LATER)
DISTRICT-SCALE FLOOD PROTECTION FOR 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD
North Charlestown and New Charles River Dam Locations Combined28
(See Charlestown Focus Area for more information)
All Four East Boston Locations Combined
(See East Boston Focus Area for more information)
   North Charlestown
Orient Heights
Wood Island
Porzio Park
Dorchester Bay
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area26
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities27
Downtown Waterfront
14,800
2,430
650 acres
$1.2 billion
$122 million
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area29
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities30
1,300
370
170 acres
$238 million
$20 million
                              New Charles River Dam
                 Downtown Waterfront
               South Boston Waterfront
 (See Downtown Focus Area for more information)
New Charles River Dam, South Boston Waterfront, and Dorchester Bay
Locations Combined33
(See Downtown, Charlestown, South Boston and Dorchester Focus Areas for more information)
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area31
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities32
1,100
230
60 acres
$680 million
$71 million
Estimated Benefits
Benefiting Area34
People
Structures
Land Area
Avoided Economic Losses
From a single 1% annual chance flood
Annualized across multiple flood probabilities35
114,100
10,620
3,370 acres
$9.4 billion
$912 million
                                                            338 City of Boston: Climate Ready Boston
Jeffries Point to Central Square
26 Area protected through the 0.1 percent annual chance flood event.
27 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1 percent, 1 percent, 2 percent, and 10 percent annual chance flood events.
28 Only includes benefits in Charlestown. See table for Locations 7, 8 and 9 Combined for additional benefits citywide.
29 Area protected through the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
30 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1%, 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events.
31Area protected through the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
32 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1%, 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance flood events.
33 Does not include benefits in Charlestown, which are dependent on flood protection in North Charlestown. See table for North Charlestown and New Charles River Dam Locations Combined.
34 Area protected through the 0.1% annual chance flood event.
35 Probability-adjusted economic losses for the 0.1%, 1%, 2%, and 10% annual chance
flood events. Focus Areas 339

            