CHICAGO
MAYOR LORI E. LIGHTFOOT
2022
CAP CHICAGO CLIMATE
ACTION PLAN
CHISTAR CHISTAR CHISTAR CHISTAR
TABLE OF CONTENTS
VI 2022 CAP At A Glance
2
 Plan Background
5 Glossary
9 Vision, Principles, And Objectives Leading With Justice And Equity
14 Climate Change And Climate Justice 101
23 Climate Financing And Delivery Capacity
34 Chicago’s GHG Reduction Targets
35 Chicago GHG Emissions Reduction Target Pathway
38 Climate Action Strategies
43 Pillar 1 | Increase Access To Utility Savings And Renewable Energy, Prioritizing Households
59 Pillar 2 | Build Circular Economies To Create Jobs And Reduce Waste
69 Pillar 3 | Deliver A Robust Zero-Emission Mobility Network That Connects Communities
And Improves Air Quality
93 Pillar 4 | Drive Equitable Development Of Chicago’s Clean-Energy Future
123 Pillar 5 | Strengthen Communities And Protect Health
146 Adaptation And Resiliency
152 Accountability And Implementation
154 Looking Ahead
155 Implementation Table
163 Appendix
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan i
Land Acknowledgement
The historic Land Acknowledgement was adopted by the City on November 17th,
2021. The City of Chicago is located on land that is and has long been a center
for Native peoples. The area is the traditional homelands of the Anishinaabe, or
the Council of the Three Fires: the Ojibwe, Odawa, and Potawatomi Nations.
Many other Nations consider this area their traditional homeland, including
the Myaamia, Ho-Chunk, Menominee, Sac and Fox, Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea,
Kickapoo, and Mascouten. The City specifically acknowledges the contri
-
butions of Kitihawa of the Potawatomi in fostering the community that has
become Chicago. We acknowledge all Native peoples who came before us
and who continue to contribute to our city. We are committed to promoting
Native cultural heritage.
This acknowledgement is offered to bring awareness and understanding of the
legacy of Indigenous peoples as traditional and contemporary stewards of the
local land and waterways. It is also an invitation to rethink the relationships
between the city, the land, and the environment.
Team Acknowledgement
The 2022 Climate Action Plan was developed with a sincere sense of hope,
urgency, and ambition for Chicago’s future. City departments, community
partners, business leaders, and other stakeholders are working together to
bring direct relief to residents and local businesses. Stakeholders are modern
-
izing systems, policies, and investments to heal and restore communities;
climate and environment priorities are part of that work. With historic local,
state, and federal investments becoming available, the time is now for trans
-
formative climate leadership.
The Office of the Mayor extends a warm note of appreciation to the various
department liaisons, advocates and residents, and others who engaged in the
development of this plan. Along with the thousands of resident voices who
participated in developing this plan, the collective leadership of the 2022
Climate Action Plan team has created bold climate goals that seek to rectify
historic practices that have perpetuated harm and to reimagine systems in
order to achieve a more just, safe, resilient, and vibrant future for those who
inherit our city.
Thank you for all your contributions.
OFFICE OF THE MAYOR
CITY OF CHICAGO
Angela Tovar
Chief Sustainability Officer
Kyra Woods
2022 Climate Action Plan Lead
Project Manager
Jared Policicchio
Deputy Director of Policy
Gabriela Wagener-Sobrero
Environmental Policy Advisor
Gavin Taves
Climate and Energy Program
Manager
TECHNICAL ADVISORS
WSP
Jenny Carney
Vice President
Ryan Dick
Senior Project Director
Jeff Irvine
Senior Project Director
Elias Menninger
Associate Consultant
Alec Iacovelli
Graphic Designer
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
CONSULTANT
MUSE COMMUNITY + DESIGN
Uri Pachter
Director
Shashwat Arya
Associate
Aaron Gatdula
Associate
Adam Glueckert
Associate CHICAGO
Mayor Lori E. Lightfoot
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan ii iii
Dear Chicagoans,
One of the greatest honors of serving as Chief
Sustainability Officer is having the opportunity
to ensure a more vibrant, safe, and resilient future
for the City of Chicago. The overarching theme of
the 2022 Climate Action Plan (CAP) is to ensure
widespread delivery of equitable benefits that both
reduce carbon emissions and provide relief and
opportunity to individuals and communities. In a
city with 2.7 million residents and seventy-seven
community areas, and the third largest city in the
U.S., there is no one-size approach to Chicago’s
climate issues. To achieve the ambitious goals of
the plan, more holistic solutions that reach beyond
GHG reduction targets that are centered on equity
and justice and prioritize health and safety were
identified and included in the CAP.
 We recognize that ongoing oppression, racism, and
discrimination in Chicago have led to disparities
and inequities in public health, economic stability
and overall quality of life, for our Black, Brown,
and low-income communities. Additionally, due
to historical lack of community investment, the
impacts and effects of climate issues and challenges
are exacerbated in these communities, increasing
their vulnerability. Our commitment to equity will
require continued focus and targeted actions to
ensure that communities on the frontlines of the
climate crisis are prioritized in the future imple
-
mentation of the CAP.
Crafting holistic solutions requires an under
-
standing of the concerns and challenges
everyday Chicagoans face. For this reason,
we embarked on a year-long public engagement
process that involved multiple townhalls, public
comment periods, and informational sessions.
These were critical to developing a plan that not
only set the path forward to achieve the broader
goals of the administration, but a plan that is based
in the reality of Chicagoans from all sides of the city.
The COVID-19 pandemic, the exposure of deep and
systemic racism, and the compounding impacts
of the climate crisis have radically changed our
world and have underscored the importance of
prioritizing our residents, our communities, and
our health. The City of Chicago accepts the respon
-
sibility of advancing this plan and are committed
to creating more opportunities for collaboration
with the City’s robust network of frontline leaders,
experts and stakeholders, to ensure that the plan
remains aligned with the climate solutions and
community priorities that Chicagoans have offered
throughout the year-long engagement process.
We know that advancing the plan equitably will
take dedicated effort and continued practice. We
invite all readers of this plan to join us in this effort.
In partnership,
Angela Tovar
Letter from the
CHIEF
SUSTAINABILITY
OFFICER
My Fellow
Chicagoans,
It is with great pride that I share the 2022 Climate
Action Plan (CAP) for the City of Chicago. The 2022
CAP is a strategic document that outlines updated
goals and actions that city departments and sister
agencies can lead, in coordination with community
partners, institutions, civic leaders and residents,
to mitigate the disastrous effects of climate change
and to collectively realize a thriving green economy
for all of our 77 communities. In 2008, Chicago
became one of the first cities in the country to
release a climate action plan, and I am honored to
continue this legacy of climate leadership.
I am also incredibly proud to lead this City guided
by our North Star of equity and inclusion. I urge
all readers to apply an equity lens as you review
the CAP. We must all recognize that low-income
communities and communities of color, many of
which are overburdened by pollution and other
forms of environmental injustice in this City, are
disproportionately impacted by climate change.
As we continue our recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic and deal with the harsh realities of the
climate crisis, the 2022 CAP proposes bold new
actions to deliver ambitious emissions reductions,
emphasizing key equitable co-benefits including:
improved air quality; increased household savings;
and environmental justice for our most overbur
-
dened communities.
This plan recognizes that equity is a process, not
solely an outcome. To this end, my administration
focused its efforts on connecting thousands of
Chicagoans to the CAP development process to
both amplify and integrate the voices and insights
of historically marginalized Chicagoans, ensuring
their seat at the decision-making table.
The world has changed drastically since the release
of our first Climate Action Plan fourteen years
ago. Scientists and climate experts have since
issued a stark warning urging leaders across the
globe to act boldly and decisively. This plan offers
a responsive pathway to advance actions to miti
-
gate climate change while equitably centering our
communities, our people and our City. To kickstart the implementation of my administration’s
climate strategy, we are investing $188 million in
equity-focused interventions, spanning building
retrofits, the expansion of the air quality monitoring
network, to the planting of over 75,000 trees. The
sum of these actions represents the beginning of
our transition to a climate just society, the future
of which is defined in this document.
Chicagoans, this is our opportunity to maximize
local benefits for communities by prioritizing those
most vulnerable to climate change, generating
wealth and workforce opportunities through a
thriving green economy. By drastically reducing
our reliance on fossil fuels, developing renewable
energy resources, and centering nature-based
solutions, we can sustain our communities for
generations to come. I am confident that our
Climate Action Plan, built for and by this great
City, will deliver the thriving, sustainable, and just
future that Chicago deserves.
Sincerely,
Mayor
Letter from the
MAYOR
iv CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan
v
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
BY62%
 BY2040
CHICAGO WILL
REDUCE ITS
CARBON
FOOTPRINT
To better serve communities that disproportionately experience the chronic stress of the changing climate and the
shocks of extreme weather events, the 2022 CAP anchors
all climate strategies with the objective to create a more
just and equitable city. Alongside aggressive carbon
emission reduction investments, governments must invest
in climate actions that address and prevent furthering the
legacy of social injustices in frontline and overburdened
communities.
Economic inclusion
and savings
Reduced Pollution
Burden
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
Community health
and resiliency
Chicago’s 2022 CAP Centers On Equity Co-benefits
2017 2025 2030 2035 2040
buildings
total
2017 GHG
Emissions
69%
metric tons CO2
equivalent 31M
24transportation
%
7waste
%
BUSINESS AS USUAL
CHICAGO
MAYOR LORI E. LIGHTFOOT
Build Scale
and Capacity
• Retrofit residential and industrial
buildings
• Increase community renewables
subscriptions
• Increase Divvy and shared micromobility 
trips
• Update land use policies to encourage
sustainable development, accessibility,
and street safety
• Aggregate clean renewable energy in
proximity to Chicago
• Support equitable electrification of ride
hail and taxi fleets
• Develop a fossil-fuel plants transition
strategy 
• Increase CTA ridership
Achieve and
Exceed Targets
• Retrofit City-owned, sister agency-owned, and
commercial buildings
• Achieve building electrification targets
• Enable 100% electrification of delivery fleets
• Electrify the City’s fleet
• Divert 90% of residential waste
• Enable 2,500 new public passenger electric vehicle
charging stations
• Achieve 100% clean renewable energy
community-wide
• Encourage 3,000 megawatts of new energy demand
reduction
• Enable Chicagoans to walk, bike, take transit, or use
shared micromobility for 45% of all trips
2022 CAP TRAJECTORY Progress for
the People
• Expand use of commuter benefits 
• Install 5 megawatts of co-owned community
solar projects
• Establish a robust outdoor air quality
monitoring network
• Strengthen policies that support green roofs,
walls, trees, and other vegetative cover
• Introduce community-wide organic waste
collection 
• Increase Chicago-based community
renewables to 20 megawatts
• Ensure 150 megawatts of energy storage
• Resource community-led climate
infrastructure projects 
• Integrate community resilience and climate
justice criteria into department-level strategic
planning and annual budget setting

plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Chicago cannot solve the global climate crisis on its
own, but the city will continue to be a global leader in
the fight. In 2008—while grappling with the effects of
the Great Recession—Chicago became the first major
American city to create a comprehensive climate action plan. Guided by residents, climate
experts, and community organizations, Chicago’s original CAP outlined a strategic framework
for measuring and mitigating greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and related climate impacts.
The 2008 CAP identified detailed climate actions that city officials, businesses, and residents
could take that aligned with community goals. While the 2008 CAP was ahead of its time, a
lot has changed since then. It is time for an update that reflects the latest climate science,
community needs, and commitment to a more just society. We have an opportunity to learn
from our past and build upon Chicago’s history of climate leadership.
Our new plan is a strong, bold response to the climate
crisis that is rooted in equity and collaboration. This
plan serves as a playbook to guide and enable actions
that reduce Chicago’s contribution to global climate
change, prepare our communities for the effects of a
changing climate, and support a just transition to a
thriving green economy. Delivering a just transition
requires enacting principles and processes that support
communities that have been burdened by harmful
economic, policy, and environmental practices so that
all Chicagoans have access to clean environments and
thriving economies.
The 2022 CAP prioritizes emission-reduction initia
-
tives that increase household monetary savings,
create new workforce opportunities, reduce pollu
-
tion burden, improve access to public services, and
support community health. The goals and strategies
of this plan are ambitious and cannot be achieved with
current budgets, organizational structures, and labor
markets. Advancing environmental justice and striving
toward a more equitable city requires resources to
support public education and engagement through
community organizations, zero-carbon-economy skills
training, cross-sector collaboration, and accountability.
PLAN
BACKGROUND
WHAT IS A CLIMATE
ACTION PLAN?
1 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan
2
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Accountability
To achieve the ambitious goals of the 2022 CAP, the
written strategies must become real policies, programs,
and partnerships that benefit all Chicagoans. The scale
of change envisioned in this plan requires many groups
to take transformative actions. A strong accountability
and reporting framework is needed to make sure that
these actions begin and that continual and meaningful
progress is made until the city achieves a just zerocarbon economy. This plan was written knowing that
changes across government leadership can greatly
affect the rate of progress toward the 2022 CAP’s goals.
Therefore, priorities and measurements of success
must be co-developed and regularly evaluated with
diverse stakeholders to support consistent implementation despite staff or leadership changes. Progress
reports must be easy to access and understand. They
must track actions relevant to all Chicago communities,
particularly traditionally underserved communities.
Governance and Reporting
City departments and sister agencies will be key to
executing many of the actions listed in the 2022 CAP.
These departments will explore, share, and publicly
track incremental targets that will keep pace with
the vision of the 2022 CAP. The City will also establish
community-led climate advisory boards and forums
for regular community participation in implementing,
reporting, and achieving the actions related to the
2022 CAP.
The City also practices accountability by reporting
progress on carbon-reduction strategies and other
climate goals to national and global institutions. This
level of reporting supports implementation continuity
between mayoral administrations. In addition, many
of these institutions provide access to technical help
or networks of other global cities leading on climatechange policies and action. These networks support
Chicago in setting and achieving bold climate targets.
City carbon-reduction reports include citywide data,
but details can be added to enable a deeper evaluation
of community-level impact. Examples of this reporting
include greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory reporting
every 3 to 5 years, annual reporting to the Chicago
Department of Public Health (CDPH), and an annual
Clean Energy Scorecard rating by the American Council
for an Energy-Efficient Economy.
Investing in Climate Equity
While climate change will affect all Chicagoans, its
impact will not be felt equally across communities.
To strive toward greater climate equity, the City must
evaluate and optimize practices across departments
and sister agencies. These evaluations will involve
community leadership to ensure that a community’s
needs influence the improvements. In addition to
refining existing practices, the City will continue to
identify funding opportunities that support building
the capacity and capital required for progress.
As a part of the 2022 budget, the City has committed
significant funding to strengthen existing, introduce
new, and anticipate future initiatives. The Climate
Financing and Delivery Capacity section provides more
detail about the historic climate action investments
the City has made. Results from these investments will
inform future climate policies, and strong performance
will build momentum for more funding.
Policy Levers
The 2022 CAP serves as a goal-setting initiative to
support future policy development and strategic planning. Formal resolutions have often been effective
drivers of the City’s sustainability vision. Resolutions
must be introduced and passed by the City Council and
highlight City priorities. For example, the 2019 resolution—Support for Implementation of Clean Energy
Transition Plan (R2019-157)—established the City’s
goal to transition to citywide renewable energy by
2035. This resolution has kickstarted initiatives like the
Request for Proposals for renewable energy supply to all
City operations. The City will develop more resolutions
and ordinances to bolster the actions of the 2022 CAP.
Policies can establish incentives for compliance and
penalties for non-compliance. All good policymaking
requires intentional consideration for those facing the
greatest impacts from the issue(s) being addressed
through the policy. It is important to meaningfully
engage these residents to ensure that further, unintentional harm is not caused.
3 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 4
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
GLOSSARY
The 2022 CAP covers a diverse set of topics and issues. This glossary contains key
words and definitions to support readers in better understanding the material covered
throughout the report.
Adaptation | Adaptation is the process of adjusting to
or preparing for a changing environment. Adaptation
reduces the harmful effects of climate change by
managing economic resources and critical infrastructure, encouraging technological innovation, and
applying equity principles.
Affordable housing | Units with or without public
subsidy that can be rented at a below-market rate are
considered “affordable” if a family spends no more than
30% of their income to live there.
Building electrification | Building electrification refers
to the replacement of fossil-fuel burning appliances
and equipment with efficient electric-powered options.
Building retrofits | Building retrofits are used to
improve the energy efficiency and enable energy
conservation of a building. Retrofits can include
installing energy efficient heating, ventilation and
cooling equipment, and appliances and lighting; insulating walls, roofs, and openings; or optimizing building
operations.
Circular economy | A circular economy prevents
pollution and the degradation of natural systems by
streamlining product design to reduce waste, keeping
products and materials in use, and regenerating
natural systems. This contrasts with the current linear
economy, in which materials are extracted from nature,
transformed into products, and then thrown out as
waste. By refocusing supply chains on local goods
and services, circular practices support existing local
businesses, create new jobs, and deliver significant
pollution-reduction benefits.
Climate change | Climate change is the significant
change in weather patterns that continue over multiple
decades or longer. Effects include changes in precipitation, increases or decreases in temperature, duration,
frequency, and intensity of extreme weather events.
Community renewables | Community renewables refer
to a renewable energy installation with multiple owners
or subscribers. This model is helpful when a subscriber
cannot install renewable energy on a property such
as renters or those with insufficient solar capacity on
their property.
Community resiliency | Community resiliency is
the sustained ability of a community to use available
resources to respond to, withstand, and recover from
adverse situations. This allows for the adaptation and
growth of a community after disaster strikes.
Cumulative burden | The cumulative burden of climate
change is a combination of exposure to pollution,
extreme weather events, and other factors that can
negatively contribute to these problems. Such factors
include limited access to healthcare and healthy foods,
poor housing quality, and lack of open green spaces.
Social stressors and preexisting health conditions
in frontline communities can also negatively affect
environmental risks.
Electrification | Electrification refers to transitioning
away from direct fossil-fuel combustion in equipment
and vehicles by replacing fossil-fuel powered equipment with alternatives that run on electricity.
Embodied carbon | Embodied carbon is the carbon
footprint of a material. Embodied carbon considers
the environmental impact of materials throughout the
supply chain as well as manufacturing and transportation processes. Construction materials such as steel
and concrete are high in embodied carbon. Embodied
carbon can be reduced by reusing and recycling materials.
Energy burden | Energy burden is the percentage of
household income spent on energy costs such as utility
bills. According to the US Department of Energy, the
energy burden for low-income households is three
times higher than for non-low-income households.
Energy efficiency | Energy efficiency is using less
energy to perform a specific task than is typically
required.
Energy storage | Energy storage is the capture of
energy produced at one time for use at a later time
to reduce imbalances between energy demand and
energy production.
Equitable transit-oriented development (ETOD) | This
kind of development enables people of all incomes,
races and ethnicities, ages, gender, and ability to experience the benefits of dense, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented development near transit hubs.
Equity | The City of Chicago defines equity as both
an outcome and a process that results in fair and just
access to opportunity and resources that provide
everyone the ability to thrive.
Freight fleet | A freight fleet is a small or large number
of vehicles operating under the same ownership to
transport goods by truck, train, ship, or planes, as in
the transportation of consumer goods.
Frontline communities | Frontline communities are
those that experience the most immediate and worst
impacts of climate change due to factors such as
chronic exposure to sources of pollution, weakened
community resilience due to compounding economic,
health, and environmental challenges, and limited
ability to influence decision-making processes. They
are typically communities of color, Indigenous communities, and low-income communities.
Grid reliability | Grid reliability is the capacity of a
power system to deliver the quantity and quality of
electricity needed by all customers who use the grid.
Interconnection | Interconnection is the linkage of
energy generation systems (for example, residential
solar) to the electric power system. Interconnection
enables renewable energy sources to connect to power
grids.
Just Transition | The trade union movement developed
this framework to encompass social interventions
needed to secure workers’ rights and livelihoods when
economies are shifting to sustainable production. A
“just transition” approach ensures that decision-makers
prioritize the needs of communities most affected by
a policy not limited to labor workers.
Low- or moderate-income (LMI) | Low- or moderate-income is used to identify people and households
who make less than 80% of an area’s median income.
Mitigation | Mitigation refers to methods for reducing
the human impact on the environment—specifically
climate systems—including strategies to reduce GHG
emissions (such as energy efficiency) and methods of
capturing carbon (such as planting trees).
Nature-based climate solutions | Nature-based climate
solutions are actions that conserve or restore ecosystems or improve land management practices.
5 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 6
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Net-zero | Net-zero refers to the balance of remaining
emissions after climate action with removal and perma
-
nent storage of carbon from the atmosphere.
Protected bike lanes | Protected bike lanes separate
cyclists from vehicular traffic using concrete curbs or
other types of physical barriers.
Quality-of-life metrics | Quality of life is associated
with the extent to which individuals can meet their
needs, wants, and aspirations. Standard quality-of-life
indicators may include wealth, employment, the envi
-
ronment, physical and mental health, education, recre
-
ation and leisure time, social belonging, religious beliefs,
safety, security, and freedom.
Redlining | Redlining is the illegal practice of denying
investment to residents, business owners or commu
-
nity institutions based on race. Though illegal today,
the effects of this well enforced, historic policy can be
seen today in disparities in homeownership and other
community-level economic investments.
Renewable energy | Renewable energy is collected
from resources that are naturally replenished on a
human timescale, including from sources like sunlight,
wind, rain, tides, waves, and geothermal heat, which
are carbon neutral.
Resiliency | Resiliency is the ability to anticipate,
prepare for, respond to, and recover from the impacts
of climate change. These impacts include extreme
weather events, flooding, and sea level rise, as well
as the various social and economic impacts of such
shocks and stresses.
Ride hail | Ride hailing is when riders hire a car and
driver on a short-term basis to take them to a specified
destination. Ride hailing includes taxi services as well
online ride-hailing platforms such as Uber and Lyft.
Transit | Transit is a system of local transportation
such as buses and trains used by people to commute
to work, school, entertainment, etc. It is distinct from
personal vehicular and long-distance travel.
Transit electrification | Transit electrification is the
process of replacing technologies that use fossil fuels
(coal, oil, and natural gas) with alternatives that use
electricity as an energy source. The greatest health and
climate benefits of electrification are achieved when
the new systems are powered by electricity generated
by clean renewable sources.
Transportation | The term transportation includes
transit, private vehicles, ride-hailing services, and
freight.
Underserved | An underserved population or commu
-
nity has limited access to health care and other types
of services. People who are underserved face economic
and social barriers that prevent them from accessing
services or receiving the same quality of services as
those who are not underserved.
Urban heat island | Urban heat islands are areas that
absorb and retain heat due to dense concentration of
pavement, buildings, and other urban features. These
areas are hotter than surrounding areas and have
limited natural land cover to reduce temperatures.
Vulnerable | Vulnerability is used to describe popula
-
tions or an area that may be more prone to negative
impacts due to a combination of sociodemographic,
health, and occupational factors. When compounded,
these conditions may reduce a group’s ability to avoid,
recover from, or adapt to hardship.
Waste management | Waste management is the process
of collecting, transporting, treating, and disposing
of waste. It also involves reducing waste production
through reuse and recycling.
CITY OF CHICAGO DEPARTMENTS
AND SISTER AGENCIES:
AIS, Department of Assets, Information and Services
BACP, Business Affairs and Consumer Protection
CCC, City Colleges of Chicago
CDA, Chicago Department of Aviation
CDOT, Chicago Department of Transportation
CDPH, Chicago Department of Public Health
CFD, Chicago Fire Department
CHA, Chicago Housing Authority
CPD, Chicago Park District
CPS, Chicago Public Schools
CTA, Chicago Transit Authority
DOB, Department of Buildings
DOH, Department of Housing
DPD, Department of Planning and Development
DSS, Department of Streets and Sanitation
DWM, Department of Water Management
OEMC, Office of Emergency Management and
Communications
OERJ, Office of Equity and Racial Justice
PBC, Public Building Commission
7 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan
8
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
VISION, PRINCIPLES,
AND OBJECTIVES
LEADING WITH JUSTICE
AND EQUITY
As greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions rise, changes in climate will continue to accelerate and pose greater risks
to our health, economy, and general livelihoods. Like other public health threats, the climate crisis has a greater
impact on certain populations. Populations who are most vulnerable to climate impacts include health-compromised individuals, older adults, pregnant individuals, children, individuals with less income stability, communities located closer to sources of pollution, and communities with limited access to goods, social services, and
other resources. Some of these vulnerabilities are the result of harmful discrimination and underinvestment
policies such as economic disinvestment practices or redlining. Therefore, to better serve communities that
disproportionately experience the chronic stress of the changing climate and the shocks of extreme weather
events, the 2022 CAP anchors all climate strategies with the goal to create a more just and equitable city.
Alongside aggressive carbon emission-reduction
investments, governments must intentionally practice advancing equity through modernizing programs,
processes, and targets. The City of Chicago defines
equity as both an outcome and a process that results
in fair and just access to opportunities and resources
that provide everyone with the ability to thrive. In
practice, this means investing in climate actions that
solve the priorities of overburdened- and frontline
communities and using climate related investments to
drive new opportunities and benefits to those most at
risk of impact or further burden. Due to the complexity
of the climate crisis and the different ways impacts are
experienced, the issue must be approached comprehensively from multiple angles and points of view.
Furthermore, addressing the climate crisis holistically
requires interconnected strategies and solutions that
work together and get at the root causes of issues.
The 2022 CAP is built around climate actions that deliver
multiple, meaningful benefits to residents and their
communities while also reducing emissions. These
co-benefits include:
1. Economic inclusion and savings
2. Reduced pollution burden
3. Equitable access to critical infrastructure
4. Community health and resiliency
Actions that deliver co-benefits in the following categories form the backbone of a new era of climate action
in Chicago.
Economic Inclusion and Savings
In the transition to a clean-energy economy, the City
will explore pathways to better connect residents
to resources and services to save money by saving
energy; to better understand and address barriers to
owning clean-energy power and storage; to build out
procurement and workforce development strategies to
stimulate greater inclusion and diversity; and to expand
the clean-energy labor force. To realize these benefits
locally, the 2022 CAP aims to retrofit a large portion of
the city’s residential buildings and to enact meaningful
updates to the city’s building codes and standards. In
both domains, the goal is to use less energy and to get
energy from cleaner sources. The financial benefits to
low-income households can come in multiple forms.
Lower monthly utility costs increase household savings,
job training provides economic upward mobility, and
growth of the clean-energy economy provides access
to new forms of business ownership and employment
in the fields of community education and services,
building efficiency, electrification, and solar installation.
Reduced Pollution Burden
Fossil-fuel energy use causes harm beyond climate
change. Diesel- and gas-powered vehicles contribute
to pollution burden along busy roadways. Waste transport and processing heightens pollution in adjacent
neighborhoods. Gas-powered furnaces and cookstoves can create unhealthy air in homes. The 2022 CAP
promotes actions that go beyond reducing GHGs to
also preventing the local air pollution that contributes
to asthma and other health issues. Because frontline
populations have higher exposure to these pollutants,
the City is committed to advancing environmental
justice to address a range of issues: establishing more
circular practices to divert waste from landfills and
pollution-heavy processing; electrifying municipal,
commercial, and industrial fleets; and providing affordable access to clean renewable energy and related
technologies like electric vehicles.
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 9 10
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Equitable Access to
Critical Infrastructure
Many climate actions require adopting new
technology, with upfront costs that can be
out of reach for low- and moderate- income
households. Without equitable access to
clean energy, clean transit, and the broad
-
band networks that enable full participa
-
tion in today’s economy, climate actions
have the potential to increase disparities
between low- and high-income house
-
holds. To address this potential adverse
effect, the 2022 CAP prioritizes actions and
investments that ensure that no Chicagoan
is left behind in the transition to cleaner
technologies.
Community Health and
Resiliency
Taken together, climate actions shaped
through the lens of equity and justice can
reduce the quality-of-life disparities that
persist across US cities, including Chicago.
To be considered successful, the actions in
the 2022 CAP must not only reduce GHG
emissions but also improve health and qual
-
ity-of-life indicators. These include reduced
levels of energy burden; improved water,
soil, and air quality; and easy access to transit and healthy food. The CAP supports the vision of
a future in which a zip code is no longer a determinant of life expectancy in our city, but instead
we are equally protected from and sufficiently prepared to bounce back from chronic health
problems, heat waves, power outages, and flash floods. Nature-based climate solutions are actions
that conserve or restore ecosystems or improve land management practices. These solutions
store carbon and are key to balancing the carbon that is emitted throughout the city. They also
enhance economic, social, and environmental vitality to improve community well-being and
resiliency. The CAP integrates nature-based climate solutions across each pillar of climate action.
EVALUATING FOR BALANCE AND SOCIAL IMPACT
Leading with justice and equity in climate action requires that actions deliver measured
improvements for communities. Systems of accountability must expand to reflect both
social impact and emissions outcomes. In practice, this means working more closely
with community networks to develop new systems for implementation, monitoring, and
evaluation. Together, there can be a better understanding of social impact and effective
program improvements. The City and partners developed the mitigation pillars and
initiatives in this plan to meet all five of the following criteria:
Equitable
Each pillar aims to maximize benefits and minimize
burdens on marginalized communities, alleviate
resource disparities, and respond to community
vulnerability and resiliency.
Balanced
The plan balances the need for local impact and
global leadership with strategies that support
connecting and strengthening Chicago communi
-
ties alongside ambitious mitigation and adaptation
strategies. Similarly, the CAP elevates the need to
invest in both nature-based climate solutions and
technology for holistic progress.
Realistic
Initiatives are timely and actionable within the
City’s legal and functional sphere of control. They
are cost-effective and fiscally responsible, relying
on strong financial mechanisms. Most importantly,
each initiative is measurable.
Ambitious
CAP actions are responsive to the climate crisis.
They incorporate the most up-to-date climate
science and recognize the urgency of both imme
-
diate and game-changing actions that signifi
-
cantly reduce emissions and improve the lives of
Chicagoans. Successful implementation of CAP
actions will require the City to update or set up
new operating models that support, monitor, and
ensure progress toward target achievement.
Adaptive
Initiatives leave flexibility to accommodate tech
-
nological, political, and cultural shifts during the
life of the CAP’s implementation.
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 11 12
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
CLIMATE CHANGE AND
CLIMATE JUSTICE 101
The damaging effects of climate change are happening now in our city. Compared to the
early 1900s, Illinois’ climate is warmer (particularly in the winter and spring) and wetter.
Precipitation has increased 12% to 15%, meaning rainier summers in Chicago. Importantly,
storm events are becoming more intense, with large amounts of rain falling over short periods
of time. These changes are expected to continue with additional increases in air temperature
and precipitation. Climate change is no longer an abstract concept.
Already, climate change disrupts our daily lives in
significant ways: • Heat waves cause heat-related deaths and illness,
worse air quality, and increased reliance on costly
electricity for fans and air conditioning.
• More frequent heavy downpours cause basement
flooding and property damage, sewage overflows,
contamination of local waterways, and transit
disruptions.
• Warmer spring temperatures lengthen the pollen
season and increase exposure to allergens.
• Changing Lake Michigan water levels and tempera
-
ture increase shoreline erosion, property damage,
and the potential for toxic algae blooms.
While all Chicagoans directly experience climatechange impacts, frontline communities experience
the most immediate and worst effects. Adding to this
climate injustice, these same populations bear the least
responsibility for industrial pollution and have gained
the least economically from the wasteful and polluting
actions that are driving climate change. Approaching
the City’s climate action and investment with the lens
of climate justice acknowledges these disparities and
prioritizes the approaches that best address the needs
of underserved communities.
The tragedy of climate injustice is evident in Chicago’s
history, with the city’s 1995 heat wave remaining one
of the deadliest climate disasters in the United States.
Many of the 739 victims were elderly, low-income
and Black, living in apartments without ventilation
or air conditioning, in neighborhoods lacking social
infrastructure and critical resources. An extreme-heat
event in 1999 was also deadly, revealing a pattern of
greater risk to those living in neighborhoods in more
industrialized parts of the city. In these areas, with
less greenspace and more asphalt, heat islands spur
devastating health challenges for people battling a
combination of worse air pollution and higher tempera
-
tures. Meanwhile, wealthier residents living near parks
or by the lakeshore, in well-equipped buildings, can
take easy refuge from the dangers of extreme heat.
Since those two tragic heat waves in the 1990s, the City
has developed extreme-heat emergency response plans,
bringing critical infrastructure like cooling centers
and buses online, and deploying wellness checks for
vulnerable residents. Continued assessment and invest
-
ment in the needs of frontline communities is core to
meeting the challenges of climate change with a lens
of climate justice.
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 13 14
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
CHICAGO’S FRONTLINE CLIMATE LEADERSHIP
Community leaders on the frontlines of the
climate crisis, here in Chicago and throughout
the world, have long advocated for and are
leading their communities through a just tran
-
sition away from fossil-fuel based economies to
more regenerative solutions that prioritize the
health and well-being of residents and prevent
future environmental harms. An important
element of equitably addressing the climate
crisis is to ensure that the solutions deriving
from communities most affected by climate
change are uplifted and that their leadership
and expertise are valued in all planning and
implementation processes. Chicago is home
to many frontline community organizations
leading on climate solutions including Blacks
In Green (BIG), Little Village Environmental
Justice Organization (LVEJO), and People for
Community Recovery (PCR). Building upon
their respective local programs and advocacy,
these organizations have expanded their advo
-
cacy work to ensure sustained impact. BIG,
LVEJO, and PCR supported the development
and passage of Illinois’ historic energy legis
-
lation, including the Future Energy Jobs Act
(FEJA) and Climate and Equitable Jobs Act (CEJA)
and continue to support communities most
impacted by industrialization and climate across
Chicagoland, the state of Illinois, and the nation.
Pioneered and piloted by BIG! Blacks In Green, The Sustainable
Square Mile™ works at the intersection of environment and
economy, pollution and poverty, reinventing local economies
where Black families can walk-to-work, walk-to-shop, walk-tolearn, walk-to-play – here in the Age of Climate Crisis. BIG’s vision
creates a buffer of resilience for Black communities by generating
health and wealth through economies in clean energy, green
infrastructure, affordable housing, heritage tourism, and waste
management. By connecting one sustainable-square-mile at a
time, BIG hopes to create a “City of Villages” – self-sustaining,
mixed-income, walkable-villages that reduce greenhouse gases;
circulate investment to neighbor-owned businesses and lands;
and measurably increase the household income of its residents –
BIG’s core goal. In this way, with its allies, BIG envisions helping
close America’s racial health-wealth gap. To learn more about
BIG’s work, visit www.blacksingreen.org
Blacks In Green
Located in the Little Village community area of Chicago, LVEJO
is a nonprofit organization that works with communities across
Chicago to address the root causes of environmental justice issues.
LVEJO has successfully advocated for closing the Fisk and Crawford
Power plants, for improving public transit in areas of high demand
and minimal access, and for reducing air pollution and expanding
green spaces through remediating and redeveloping brownfields.
Beyond successful clean power, public transit, and open space
campaigns, LVEJO remains committed to advocating for safe
and affordable drinking water for residents and serves on the
City’s Lead Service Line Replacement Advisory Group. LVEJO is
proactively building the green economy in their community by
creating a 1.3-acre urban farm, which will include a fruit orchard,
local vendor opportunities, and urban agriculture training for local
residents. To learn more about LVEJO’s work, visit www.lvejo.org
People For Community Recovery (PCR) is a local nonprofit orga
-
nization that advocates for housing justice and enhancing the
quality of life of residents living in communities that are affected
by chronic industrial pollution. Their community-driven projects
address the underlying causes of environmental injustice, such
as lack of transit, poor air quality, inadequate housing, and lack of
green spaces. PCR is devoted to honoring founder Hazel Johnson’s
legacy by holding polluters accountable to their community impacts
and working with local residents to envision climate solutions that
improve their environment and their community. PCR is working
on preserving, restoring, and redeveloping the national land
-
mark Altgeld Gardens; securing local clean-energy projects and
workforce development opportunities for the far South Side and
ensuring that various development projects (such as the CTA Red
Line Extension and riverfront revitalization) benefit community
members rather than displacing them. To learn more about PCR’s
work, visit www.peopleforcommunityrecovery.org
Little Village
Environmental
Justice
Organization
People For
Community
Recovery
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 15 16
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
6329 S. Paulina
ADDRESS PAIRS
EXAMINING HOW HISTORIC INEQUITIES
WORSEN CLIMATE IMPACTS
POLLUTION PATTERNS
AND THE LINES OF
URBAN SEGREGATION
5400 S. Hermitage resident
6400 N. Hermitage residents
MAP TWINS
The patterns of disproportionate pollution burden and climate inequities within
Chicago follow familiar lines. Tonika Johnson’s Folded Map Project explores
how the practice of redlining in the 1930s—and other racist policies—set the
stage for harmful race-based segregation, leading to underinvestment in Black
neighborhoods that can be readily seen by comparing the buildings, streets,
and community spaces in different Chicago neighborhoods. The consequences
continue nearly 100 years later as climate vulnerability, pollution burden, and
economic insecurity bring new and old threats to those same communities.
6330 N. Paulina
Photos and Infographic Credit: Tonika Johnson, Folded Map Project
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 17 18
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
TREE
EQUITY
Data shows that Chicago’s urban tree canopy is
not equally distributed across the city. Whereas
the city average canopy coverage is only 16%, in historically under-resourced and underserved community
census tracts, it is even less and varies from 4% to 10%. As
demonstrated by the map, community areas in most need of
trees are largely concentrated on the city’s west, southwest,
and south sides. Communities in these regions with low
tree canopy also disproportionately face urban heat island
effects in the summer and experience more frequent
flooding. Planting trees can help our communities be
more resilient to the impact of climate events while also
reducing GHGs.
A diverse 70-member community-based working group from
across Chicago neighborhoods supports the City’s tree equity
strategy. A tree data tool that helps prioritize the planting
of trees in areas of Chicago where the benefits of trees are
most needed guides the initiative. By looking at tree canopy
coverage and overlaying this data with public health metrics,
heat vulnerability, and air quality data, the City is further able
to analyze and prioritize tree planting at the community level.
Together with city departments and community partners,
Chicago has the goal of planting 75,000 trees by 2026.
Lowest Tree Coverage N
Concentration of Trees
Highest Tree Coverage
One clear result of our changing climate is the more
frequent or more intense extreme weather events. In Chicago,
climatologists anticipate longer warm seasons, more days of
extreme heat, rising night temperatures, and more intense
rains. Intense winters will remain a concern for our region as
well. In any of these events, the City can use climate, health,
geographic and demographic data to better understand
which communities may be most vulnerable to the
forthcoming event.
Vulnerable Chicagoans are at a higher risk to injury or
death from the effects of climate-change-related extreme
weather events than most people. An increase in hospital admissions of people with respiratory, heart, and kidney disease can
occur during significant heat events or where people are socially
isolated, lack mobility, and are unable to self-evacuate during
heavy snows, rains, and floods. Geographic sensitivity or indicators related to infrastructure may also influence vulnerability. For
instance, urban heat islands (shown in the map as purple) signify
that built environments (like buildings, streets, and sidewalks)
are much warmer than their surroundings because they absorb
heat, making them difficult to cool.
The City can use various data sets to develop a heat vulnerability index to better discern areas where communities may be
in greatest need of strategic climate resilience or public health
support. This data informed decision-making process can prioritize green infrastructure investments, ensure development plans
don’t increase community risks, and identify where community-led resiliency networks and hubs could support local health
workers and emergency management teams.
N
EXTREME
WEATHER
VULNERABILITY
Above Average Severity
Urban Heat Severity
Highest Severity
Credit: Dr. Christian Braneon,
Data Scientist at d3i Systems
This map was created as a result of activities associated with the
NASA-Microsoft partnership through collaboration between
NASA, Microsoft, ESRI, City of Chicago Department of Planning
and Development and City Tech Collaborative.
See Appendix for map data source and
visualization methodology.
See Appendix for map data source and
visualization methodology.
19 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 20
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Unstable energy prices can be particularly challenging
for families experiencing economic hardship. When 6% or
greater of gross household income is spent on utility bills,
residents experience energy burden. In Chicago this is a
reality for 4% of all households. Factors such as the rise
of cost of electricity and natural gas in combination with
home inefficiency (for example: poor insulation, aging
appliances, and outdated equipment) make it difficult
for residents experiencing economic hardship to pay
their bills, thus putting them at risk of being discon
-
nected or having an additional economic burden such
as a bad credit score. Home inefficiency and moderate
wages disproportionately cause energy burden in west,
south, and far south communities—home to many Black
and Latinx residents. This map illustrates data on energy
burden across Chicago.
Chicago’s equity strategy to expand energy efficiency
programs and increase renewable energy supply are a
critical step forward toward reducing energy burden and
relieving those having trouble paying their utility bills.
Additionally, targeted interventions such as the federally
sponsored programs (Weatherization Assistance Program
and the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program)
for income-qualified households are essential assistance
tools. Furthermore, continuing the Chicago Department
of Housing’s Home Repair Program and leveraging the
$26 million in new low-income housing retrofit projects
in the Chicago Recovery Plan to equitably decarbonize,
weatherize, and retrofit homes can also provide critical
long-term solutions for overburdened households.
Lowest energy burden
Energy Burden
Highest energy burden
N
AFFORDABLE
ENERGY
ACCESS
See Appendix for map data source and
visualization methodology.
21 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 22
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
CLIMATE
FINANCING
AND DELIVERY
CAPACITY
In 2008, Chicago became the first major American
city to create a comprehensive climate action
plan. The goals within the plan aimed to reduce
citywide emissions 25% by 2020 and 80% by
2050 from 1990 levels. In 2011, Chicago updated
its climate action strategies in the Chicago
Sustainability Agenda 2015. The report sharp
-
ened strategies to accelerate efforts to reach the
goals in the 2008 CAP. Since 2011, the City has
launched building-block policies and initiatives
to build greater capacity to deliver on the City’s
climate targets. • Benchmarking Ordinance, 2013: This ordinance supports
greater transparency on energy usage across the
building sector. Existing municipal, commercial, and
residential buildings that are 50,000 square feet and
larger are called to track energy use, report to the City
annually, and verify data accuracy every three years.
Chicago’s benchmarking program was expanded in 2019
with the Chicago Energy Rating System, which assigns
an energy rating to covered buildings based on their
reporting and requires buildings to display the rating
in a prominent location onsite.
• Chicago Solar Express, 2013: This program
simplified the administrative process required
to install rooftop solar.
• Drive Clean Chicago, 2014: This program
provides funding to support Chicago fleet oper
-
ators and businesses for the adoption of clean
vehicles.
• Sustainable Development Policy, 2016: This
policy requires development projects that
receive financial assistance or special approvals
from the City that include sustainable elements.
• EV Readiness Ordinance, 2020: This ordi
-
nance requires new construction of a residen
-
tial building with 5 or more units and on-site
parking to have 20% of parking spaces EV Ready,
and in non-residential buildings with 30 or more
parking spaces to provide 20% of parking spaces
as EV ready.
Despite these efforts, the City fell short of its 2020
reduction target primarily because of funding gaps,
limited City staff capacity, and less coordination
of climate targets and accountabilities across City
departments and sister agencies. This shortfall
has not been unique to Chicago. Many cities that
established early CAPs have struggled to allocate
the necessary finances, staff resources, or policy
attention to address the climate crisis.
Calls for bold climate action continue to resonate
globally across all demographics, and governments
are responding. In 2015, to drive greater global
coordination and ambition, 195 countries and the
European Union adopted the Paris Agreement,
establishing a legally binding global target to limit
global warming preferably to 1.5° Celsius. In 2017,
Chicago joined more than 200 cities in formally
adopting the guidelines of the Paris Agreement
despite a lack of federal leadership at the time. On
September 20, 2019, millions of youths protested
for immediate climate action in more than 800
marches around the world. Youth leadership in
Chicago led to the formal declaration of a climate
emergency and led thousands of young Chicagoans
to demand greater leadership from the state legis
-
lature as well. In 2021, the US government passed
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. The
law provides federal funding to deliver carbonfree power ($75 billion) and support resiliency
($47 billion) by improving public transportation,
addressing pollution in overburdened communi
-
ties, rebuilding roads and bridges, and enabling
electric vehicles. The same year, the Climate and
Equitable Jobs Act (CEJA) became law in Illinois,
which commits the state to 100% carbon-free
power by 2045 and 100% clean energy by 2050.
In October 2021, Chicago’s City Council approved
$188 million for climate resiliency and mitigation, as
part of Mayor Lori Lightfoot’s $2.5 billion Chicago
Recovery Plan. This historic level of investment
toward climate action will provide funding for resil
-
ient infrastructure and green workforce develop
-
ment opportunities. Additional complementary
investments will be made in affordable housing
($157.4 million); health and wellness ($108 million);
environmental justice ($86.8 million); community
climate investments ($101.3 million); community
development ($166 million); and small business
and workforce support ($87 million). In addition
to these newly available resources, the Build Back
Better framework proposed by the US Congress
would further enable the conditions needed to
successfully deliver Chicago’s CAP.
For the first time, awareness, expertise, and funding
are aligned to support ambitious climate action in
Chicago. The City has allocated budget and opera
-
tional capacity to achieve the first next steps of the
CAP and demonstrate success to solidify climate
action as a standard line item in future annual
budgets. The initiatives in the tables following are
fully funded.
23 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 24
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Chicago Recovery Plan
funding overlap with
Chicago’s 2022 Climate
Action Plan
(total climate funding of $188M)
Investments Allocated Budget Intended Deliverables Expected Co-Benefits
Decarbonize Affordable Multifamily
Buildings $6 million
Retrofit and decarbonize 200 multifamily affordable housing units in underserved
communities. This program will support existing building retrofits and in-unit inter
-
ventions led by Chicago’s Department of Housing.
• Increased household savings • Improved thermal comfort • Economic inclusion • Improved air quality • Decreased emissions • Increased resiliency to extreme weather
Low- or Moderate-Income (LMI)
Housing Retrofits $15 million
Retrofit and decarbonize 250 LMI homes in underserved communities. This program
will support existing building retrofits and in-home interventions led by the Department
of Housing.
Neighborhood Power Project
Expansion $10 million
Complete deep retrofits in at least 10 community anchor buildings in neighborhoods
that lack access to existing capital improvement funds. The project will decrease
the energy burden on organizations and provide critical services to underserved
communities. This program aims to develop a network of resiliency hubs throughout
Chicago and provide energy education services and shelter during extreme weather.
Library Power Project $5 million Enable retrofits and install solar panels at up to 10 Chicago Public Libraries, mini
-
mizing utility costs and ensuring that we sustain our library assets for the long term.
• Improved grid reliability • Increased household savings • Decreased emissions • Increased resiliency to extreme weather Community Solar on Industrial Roofs $5 million
Generate solar energy to power at least hundreds of households via a community
solar in an industrial community. Community solar subscriptions to be prioritized in
environmental justice, frontline, and/or underserved communities that are in close
proximity to the site (s).
Expand Canopy Coverage $46 million Plant 75,000 trees over 5 years in underserved community areas.
• Reduced pollution burden • Increased home value • Lower energy burden • Improved thermal comfort • Increased carbon sink • Stormwater absorption • Reduced urban heat island
Community Green Infrastructure
Investments $5 million Install green alleys and develop targeted green infrastructure flood mitigation projects
in flood-burdened communities.
• Reduced flooding and sewage overflow • Increased home value • Increased resiliency to extreme weather
Community Composting Pilot $45 thousand Install new community compost collection hubs in neighborhoods underserved by
organics collection services.
• Reduced pollution burden concentrations • Improved soil quality
City Fleet and Building
Decarbonization $8.3 million Invest in municipal fleet electrification combined with electric vehicle charging. This
program will prioritize fleet electrification in pollution-burdened neighborhoods.
• Reduced emissions from City operations • Procurement opportunities for Minority/
Disadvantaged/Women Business Enterprises
(MBE/WBE/DBE/BEPD)
Low-Carbon Mobility Projects $10 million
Expansion of bike and micromobility infrastructure and walkability investments in
priority communities. This project will provide 5,000 bikes, helmets, and locks to
underserved Chicagoans.
• Reduced emissions from avoided vehicle trips • Increased personal mobility • Procurement opportunities for MBE/WBE/
DBE/BEPDs
Air Quality Monitoring and Land
Remediation Project $24 million Investment in a Citywide air monitoring network and partial remediation of the
former Schroud Superfund site.
• Data transparency for local air pollution
monitoring by residents
• Procurement opportunities for MBE/WBE/
DBE/BEPDs
25 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 26
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Climate Financing And Delivery
Capacity (cont.)
In addition to the City’s historic Chicago Recovery
Plan climate investments, several existing, expanded,
and new sources of funding can help Chicago meet its
climate goals. These sources exist at the local, state,
and federal levels. Some examples include: • Energy efficiency building improvements and repairs
through Chicago Small Business Improvement Funds
• Programs created or expanded by Illinois’ Climate
and Equitable Jobs Act covering a variety of areas
such as clean-energy workforce development, solar
investments in Illinois’ Black, Indigenous, and people
of color (BIPOC), low-income, and environmental
justice communities, and transportation electri
-
fication
• Programs created or expanded by the federal
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and
implemented by the US Environmental Protection
Agency, US Department of Transportation, and US
Department of Energy
• For the next 4 years, Chicago’s current electric distri
-
bution utility will implement an energy efficiency
program with a total budget likely exceeding $400M
per year (for its full Northern Illinois service terri
-
tory), with significant program spending focused
on low- and moderate-income programs as well as
programs focused on public sector energy efficiency
and electrification switching, among other measures
This is an exciting moment for Chicago to pursue
expanded funding through sources such as the above,
but it also underscores the importance of updating
Chicago’s climate goals.
Plan Development Process And
Timeline
Fourteen years after our first CAP, we face a renewed
energy for bold initiatives. In comparison to previous
years, renewable energy is cost competitive or often
cheaper than fossil fuel sources, clean-energy funding
has increased, and implementation capacity has grown.
While economic trends and policies continue to support
climate and infrastructure investments, the 2022 CAP
seeks to reflect the current needs and ambitions of
our communities.
Beginning in Summer 2021, the Office of the Mayor
hosted listening sessions to seek input from residents,
community-based organizations, local nonprofits,
industry associations, and other partners. The feed
-
back from these sessions drove the inclusion of many
initiatives in the CAP, particularly sections related to
equity and justice. Throughout the Fall/Winter 2021,
City departments and sister agencies offered feedback
on CAP strategies, actions, and targets. The insights
helped to ensure that the 2022 CAP goals are both
ambitious and attainable.
In January 2022, the Office of the Mayor hosted two
citywide town halls drawing 150+ attendees and
launched two community surveys to assess what issues
matter most to Chicagoans. In an effort to avoid exces
-
sive surveying of community partners and residents,
community feedback from other City-led planning
initiatives such as the ETOD Policy Plan (2020), We
Will Chicago (2021-present), and the 2021 Budget
Engagement Tours, were consulted. In March 2022,
the Office of the Mayor released a draft 2022 CAP for a
one-month public comment period. Chicagoans’ feed
-
back has been incorporated throughout this revised
document and the City is grateful for commenters’
time and input.
Alignment with C40
C40 is a global initiative that catalyzes and supports
cities to take immediate actions that address the
climate crisis. The C40 network includes nearly 100
city members whose membership is determined by
action and performance-based outcomes. Chicago has
been a C40 member since 2005. C40 provides cities
with resources and expertise to shape climate ambition
and action that align with science-backed targets. The
City is grateful to the C40 team for its guidance that
has helped to shape this plan and its ambitions.
EXTERNAL PARTNERS • Blacks In Green • Chicago Environmental Legal Clinic • Chicago Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights • Climate Reality Project: Chicago Metro Chapter • Elevate • Environmental Law and Policy Center • Friends of the Parks • Illinois Environmental Council • Illinois Youth Climate Movement • Metropolitan Mayors Caucus • Metropolitan Planning Council • The Morton Arboretum • The Nature Conservancy • Neighbors for Environmental Justice • NeighborSpace • Office of Modern Composition • Openlands • People for Community Recovery • Southeast Environmental Task Force • University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
27 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 28
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Community Areas We
Heard From
By collecting responses throughout the public engagement process, the City was able to shape the 2022 CAP
to address resident priorities and update outreach
strategies.
To track and evaluate engagement, participants were
asked to identify their neighborhood, along with other
information. Submissions were received from communities in blue. The City looks forward to continued
engagement with residents, particularly in communities with lower response rates.
THANK YOU
to everyone who has contributed to the 2022 CAP.
From interactive virtual town halls, two online
surveys, facilitated conversations with community partners, and comments on the draft plan,
over 2,100 Chicagoans from 70+ community areas
have shared with us their climate priorities. We
also acknowledge due to the COVID-19 pandemic
(and the Omicron variant in particular), partner
organizations found it difficult to connect with
constituents January-February 2022. While we
sought greater in-person engagement, we will
continue to leverage these partnerships moving
forward to maximize accountability and to successfully implement the 2022 CAP.
communities
Community areas
represented (91%)
Survey responses submitted by
Chicago youth (under 18)
Residents engaged
2,145
70
8
%
2022
2021
September – October
CAP Working Group
sessions
November – December
City department and sister
agency engagement
January
Virtual Town
Halls
February - March
Public Feedback
April
CAP Refinement
and Release
home 53owners
% 37renters
% 10other
%
Survey Response Profile Keywords from Survey Responses
Timeline
29 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 30
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
What Matters to You:
In collaboration with local urban planning and public engagement firm MUSE
Community + Design, the City developed a survey to hear from Chicagoans on
what they would like to see in the 2022 CAP. The survey covered four goals of
the CAP: 100% renewable energy, increase household savings, advance environmental justice, and improve community health. Respondents ranked the level
of importance of potential approaches and outcomes in achieving these goals.
Funding Your Future
In collaboration with MUSE Community + Design, the City also developed a
survey to hear from Chicagoans how they value 10 significant climate outcomes.
Having $100 to spend on these 10 climate outcomes, Chicagoans were tasked
with funding the outcomes that would most improve their quality of life. The
results from the submissions prioritized better air quality and reduced pollution
and better access to affordable and reliable renewable energy.
Total Survey Submissions
1,311
Total Survey Submissions
335
Key Outcome What Matters Most?
100% Renewable Energy Make it easy for families and businesses to sign up for renewable energy
(75% of all respondents, 75% of BIPOC respondents)
Household Savings Better access to renewable energy
(75% of respondents, 75% of BIPOC respondents)
Environmental Justice Better access to reliable transit
(82% of respondents, 82% of BIPOC respondents)
Community Health Better access to reliable transit
(78% of respondents, 76% of BIPOC respondents)
More marked, protected, and
well-connected bike lanes to keep
cyclists and e-scooter riders safe
while traveling
$9
More job opportunities that help
preserve or restore the environment
$7
Better community response plans
in case of an emergency
$10
Better access to safe, affordable,
and reliable transit that gets me
where I need to go
$11
Better access to affordable and
reliable renewable energy
$13
Closure of fossil fuel power plants
$7
Community wealth creation
through the solar energy and
battery storage economies
$9
Lower utility bills and better
energy efficiency and home
comfort
$10
Better access to safe, affordable,
and reliable bikes and e-scooters
that get me where I need to go
$8
Better air quality and reduced
pollution
$14
Chicagoans are passionate about better air quality,
improved access to renewable energy, and better
access to reliable transit, and the goals of increasing
household savings, and improving community health
and environmental justice. Survey responses and all
other forms of public feedback directly influenced the
selection of 2022 CAP actions by prioritizing initiatives
with the greatest community benefits.
What We Heard:
• “We ought to prioritize benefits to community
members who have been marginalized historically.”
• “We need to restore our canopy with diverse and
native trees and plants. This will beautify neighborhoods and provide crucial habitat for endangered
species and clean our air.”
• “Investing in clean energy will reduce bills, reduce air
pollution, and reduce the risk of climate disasters
in the future. It’s a win-win-win.”
• “Rebalancing planning decisions to heavily favor
mass transit can reshape our city for the better.”
• “Community ownership is important; we are all
impacted by climate change and so we all need to
feel part of the solution.”
The City will need ongoing support and engagement
from across our communities to determine meaningful
metrics in support of the 2022 CAP’s goals. Expanding
existing partnerships and creating new ones will foster
innovation, speed up progress, and give all Chicagoans
a voice in shaping our future.
Community Feedback Has
Shaped The 2022 CAP
Several priority themes emerged from over 300
submissions during the March to April 2022 public
comment period. The following table summarizes how
community feedback priorities have shaped the 2022
CAP. This represents some of the most commented on
areas but is not inclusive of all community feedback.
Community Priority Updates Made Between the Draft and Final 2022 CAP
Address parking minimums A new action was added (3.2.D): Update citywide car and bike parking
requirements by 2025
Provide details for priority bus
lanes Bus priority treatments were added to action 3.1.C
Provide details for bike-lane
network growth Bike network targets were added to actions 3.1.A and 3.1.C
Increase ambitions for community-wide composting
Ambition has increased for introducing community-wide organic waste
collection and decomposition. Initially, 2040 was targeted for this action;
2025 is now targeted (see action 1.1.A)
Operate in alignment with principles of environmental justice
and equity
Feasible processes to evaluate impact were identified in action 5.2.B
31 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 32
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
GHG REDUCTION
TARGETS The 2022 CAP aims to chart an equitable path to reduce Chicago’s
GHG emissions by a minimum of 62% by 2040. Following the principles
defined in this plan, this pathway prioritizes improving the lives of all
Chicagoans by promoting environmental justice, generating house
-
hold savings, improving community health, transitioning away from
fossil-fuel dependency, and ensuring that all Chicago communities
are prepared for the undeniable impacts of climate change, by 2040.
Outlined below are Chicago’s GHG reduction targets based on miti
-
gation pillars:
1 Increase energy savings, prioritizing households: 3 Enable personal mobility and well-being by providing
access to clean transport options and a first-class
walking and biking network:
2 Create jobs, develop circular economies, and improve
air quality by pioneering clean last-mile logistics:
4 Reduce household cost burdens and improve grid
reliability by powering Chicago with clean renewable
energy:
5 Reduce disparities in quality-of-life metrics across communities by inte
-
grating health and equity criteria in decision-making: Pillar 5 actions do not
directly reduce GHG emissions, however; they enable co- benefits for indi
-
vidual Chicagoans.
Pillars
reduction
reduction
reduction
8
%
3
%
6
%
45
%
reduction
Chicago’s
33 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 34
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Greenhouse Gas Inventory Summary
The emissions reductions expected from the actions in this plan use the 2017 GHG Emissions Inventory, the
most recent report, as a baseline. This inventory estimates the total GHG emissions generated from residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial activities within the city boundary. In 2017, Chicago generated
31,035,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (mtCO2e) from the activities highlighted in the chart.
CHICAGO GHG
EMISSIONS
REDUCTION TARGET
PATHWAY
2017
5M
10M
15M
20M
25M
30M
35M
40M
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040
BUSINESS AS USUAL
62% REDUCTION TARGET
MOST RECENT INVENTORY
Metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent (mtCO2e)
Drive equitable development of Chicago’s clean-energy future
Build circular economies to create jobs and reduce waste
Increase access to utility savings and renewable energy, prioritizing households
Deliver a robust zero-emission mobility network that connects communities and improves air quality
Remaining GHG emissions
Building decarbonization
provides the greatest opportunity to reduce the city’s
emissions. Buildings account
for approximately 69% of total
citywide emissions. Building
decarbonization also delivers
significant environmental
justice and equity co-benefits, including lower utility
bills, improved air quality, and
improved resident safety and
thermal comfort.
The Role of Offsets
Carbon offsets represent
carbon reduced, avoided, or
removed from the atmosphere.
Cities, companies, and individuals can purchase carbon
offset certificates from projects
located elsewhere to compensate for their own GHG emissions. Independent
third parties assess and monitor offset projects to
verify their credibility.
Chicago will not count offset credits toward its 62%
GHG reduction goal achievement. Furthermore, the
City will reduce its own emissions before taking
action beyond its borders. Slowing and ultimately
reversing climate change requires reaching a state
of net-zero GHG emissions. Net-zero refers to the
balance of remaining emissions after climate action
with removal and permanent storage of carbon from
the atmosphere. Achieving the 62% reduction target
puts Chicago on a path toward net-zero, but more
work will be needed after we achieve the goal.
As the City’s energy agenda evolves, carbon offsets
may be considered for their potential role to reach
net-zero. In parallel, the City will assess options
to remove and store carbon within City limits,
including urban forestry and soil management. This
assessment will include the evaluation of climate
resiliency benefits, support for historically overburdened communities, and other environmental
justice impacts.
Each greenhouse gas has different climate
warming effects. Many gases, such as methane
and nitrous oxide, warm the climate many times
more than carbon dioxide. For simplicity and
consistency, GHG inventories convert GHGs to
a common measurement called “carbon dioxide
equivalent.” This is the amount of CO2 that would
result in the same warming as the measured
amount of another GHG. For example, methane
warms the climate 28 times more than carbon
dioxide (1 metric ton of methane is expressed
as 28 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent).
Residential
Buildings
27%
69%
7%
24%
Residential Buildings | 27%
Commercial and Institutional
Buildings and Facilities | 25%
Manufacturing Industries and
Construction | 17%
Fugitive Emissions from Oil and
Natural Gas Systems | <1%
Non-specified Source - Calumet
WRP Biogas Flare | <1%
Energy Industries | <1%
STATIONARY 69%
On-road Transporation | 15%
Aviation | 5%
Off-road Transportation | 3%
Railways | 1%
Waterborne Navigation | <1%
TRANSPORTATION 24%
Solid Waste | 6%
Wastewater | <1%
Biological Waste | <1%
WASTE 7%
35 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 36
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
CLIMATE ACTION
STRATEGIES
HOW TO READ
THE 2022 CAP1 Increase access to utility savings and renewable energy, prioritizing
households
3 Deliver a robust zero-emission mobility network that connects
communities and improves air quality
2 Build circular economies to create jobs and reduce waste 4 Drive equitable development of Chicago’s clean-energy future 5 Strengthen communities and protect health
Pillars
The initiatives in this plan are organized into three levels:
pillars, strategies, and actions. The five pillars support the
high-level goals of the plan:
Each pillar includes multiple strategies to achieve it. These strategies call for specific, quantifiable
actions—the most granular initiatives in the plan. This hierarchy provides specific measures of success,
impact, and accountability. Many individuals and departments hold authority over the designing and
implementing approaches under these strategies. To guide those efforts, an initial list of considerations
for equity, resilience, and environmental justice are provided at the strategy level. Each pillar, strategy,
and action is described in detail in the following table.
37 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 38
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Pillar Strategy Action 1
Increase access
to utility savings
and renewable
energy, prioritizing
households
1. Retrofit buildings
A. Retrofit residential buildings with 4 or fewer units: 20%
by 2030 and 50% by 2040, prioritizing low- or moder
-
ate-income households
B. Retrofit 20% of total 5+ unit residential buildings by 2030
C. Retrofit 20% of total industrial buildings by 2030
D. Retrofit 90% of total City-owned and sister agen
-
cy-owned buildings by 2035
E. Retrofit 20% of total commercial buildings by 2035
2. Connect
communities to
renewable energy
A. Install 5 megawatts of co-owned community solar proj
-
ects by 2025
B. Increase Chicago-based community renewables to 20
megawatts by 2025
C. Increase community renewables subscriptions to
achieve 25% subscribed by low-income and/or environ
-
mental justice low-income residents by 2030
Pillar Strategy Action 2
Build circular
economies to
create jobs and
reduce waste
1. Reduce waste and
landfilling
A. Introduce community-wide organic waste collection
and decomposition by 2025
B. Implement equitable waste source prevention strategies
by 2030
C. Divert 90% of commercial, industrial, and institutional
waste by 2030
D. Divert 75% of construction and demolition waste by
2030
E. Enable building design for disassembly and reuse by
2035
F. Divert 90% of residential waste by 2040
Pillar Strategy Action 3
Deliver a robust
zero-emission
mobility network
that connects
communities
and improves air
quality
1. Make walking,
biking, or transit
viable options for
all trips
A. Expand high-quality and low-stress on-street bikeways
and off-street trails
B. Increase Divvy bikes and shared micromobility trips 30%
by 2030
C. Enable Chicagoans to walk, bike, take transit, or use
shared micromobility for 45% of all trips by 2040
2. Increase transit
performance
and encourage
equitable
transit-oriented
development
A. Update land use policies to encourage sustainable devel
-
opment, accessibility, and street safety by 2023
B. Expand use of commuter benefits by 2024
C. Require transportation demand management plans for
new development by 2025
D. Update citywide car and bike parking requirements by
2025
E. Increase CTA ridership 20% by 2030
3. Enable zeroemission transit
and fleets
A. Enable electric freight loading docks at commercial and
industrial buildings, addressing new buildings by 2025
and existing buildings by 2030
B. Support equitable electrification of ride-hail and taxi
fleets by 2030
C. Enable 100% electrification of delivery fleets by 2035
D. Electrify 100% of the City’s fleet by 2035
E. Achieve zero-emission transit fleets across Chicagoland
by 2040
39 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 40
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Pillar Strategy Action 4
Drive equitable
development of
Chicago’s cleanenergy future
1. 100% clean
renewable energy
A. Aggregate 5,000 megawatts of clean renewable energy
within a 250-mile radius of Chicago by 2030
B. Install 30 megawatts of clean renewable energy projects
on City property by 2030
C. Achieve 100% clean renewable energy community-wide
by 2035
2. Enable building and
personal vehicle
electrification
A. Enact policies that support electrified renovations and
new construction by 2023
B. Electrify 30% of total existing residential buildings by
2035
C. Electrify 20% of total existing industrial buildings by
2035
D. Electrify 10% of total existing commercial buildings by
2035
E. Electrify 90% of total existing City-owned buildings by
2035
F. Enable 2,500 new public passenger electric vehicle
charging stations by 2035
3. Align building
codes and
standards with
climate best
practices
A. Strengthen policies that support installation of green
roofs and walls, tree planting, and other vegetative cover
by 2023
B. Enable net-zero-carbon construction by 2040
4. Decommission
fossil power A. Develop a fossil-fuel plants transition strategy by 2024
5. Enable
interconnection
and storage
A. Ensure 150 megawatts of energy storage by 2025
B. Encourage 1,000 megawatts of new energy demand
reduction by 2030, and 3,000 megawatts by 2040
Pillar Strategy Action 5
Strengthen
communities and
protect health
1. Collect relevant
data
A. Report energy burden by community area by 2023
B. Develop a water and soil quality measurement and miti
-
gation strategy by 2023
C. Establish a robust outdoor air quality monitoring
network by 2025
2. Enable data-driven
decision-making
A. Publish clean energy just transition metrics by 2022
B. Integrate community resilience and climate justice
criteria into department-level strategic planning and
annual budget setting by 2023
C. Develop a Heat Vulnerability Index and integrate into
planning and development, community safety, and
public health planning processes beginning in 2023
D. Publish citywide and community-level quality-of-life
metrics on equity and sustainability by 2023
E. Assess and optimize community-level emergency
management strategies related to climate preparedness
by 2024
3. Enable community
resiliency
A. Resource community-led climate infrastructure projects
by 2022
B. Integrate community resiliency strategies with the City’s
hazard mitigation planning by 2023
41 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 42
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
1PILLAR
INCREASE ACCESS TO
UTILITY SAVINGS AND
RENEWABLE ENERGY,
PRIORITIZING HOUSEHOLDS
All Chicagoans rely on buildings as a base for their businesses, homes, and
places to gather. The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted how important effi
-
cient, healthy homes and properties are for people’s emotional, physical, and
economic health. In Chicago, most buildings run on electricity and natural gas.
We will not be able to achieve our climate
goals without an aggressive approach that
reduces overall building energy use and
carbon emissions. In 2017, energy use in
Chicago’s buildings accounted for 70% of
the city’s carbon footprint. From lighting
and appliance updates to weatherization
retrofits, increasing energy efficiency helps
to reduce this footprint. Electrifying building
systems and powering them with renewable
electricity will further reduce building GHG
emissions. The City aims to power buildings
community-wide with 100% renewable elec
-
tricity by 2035.
Aggressively accelerating energy efficiency in
new and existing buildings, along with rapid
building electrification, is needed to achieve
the ambitious goals set in the 2022 CAP. The
proposed strategies will tackle broader linked
issues, including energy burden, housing
affordability, and public health. Climate resil
-
ient and energy efficient buildings use less
energy, save money on utility bills, reduce
negative health outcomes, and protect us
during extreme weather events. We plan to
support these strategies with complementary
policy reforms, empowering building owners
to take action by reducing implementation
barriers.
As the cost of energy efficient and elec
-
trified buildings declines, programs must
be designed and implemented to ensure
that renters, homeowners, businesses, and
building owners are adequately supported
through the necessary transition. At the core
of the 2022 CAP’s equitable building decar
-
bonization proposals, all Chicagoans should
benefit from building improvements without
adding to the existing concerns of rising rents
and displacement.
Nature Based Solutions
1. Nearby trees and vegetated roofs and
walls can reduce building energy use
by keeping interiors cooler, reducing
stormwater runoff, and improving
air quality.
2. Minimizing hard pavement and maxi
-
mizing vegetation enables storm
-
water infiltration and minimizes heat
islands.
3. Strengthen enforcement of Chicago’s
Landscape Ordinance that requires
landscape measures to be incorpo
-
rated into all new or substantially
renovated business, commercial and
large residential buildings.
43 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 44
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 1
RETROFIT BUILDINGS
Chicago’s residential, commercial, and industrial buildings account for nearly 69% of the City’s carbon footprint. Reducing building energy use through efficiency will reduce the city’s GHG emissions, save residents and
businesses money, and improve the city’s resiliency to climate shocks and stressors. Upgraded technologies
that deliver reliable efficiency outcomes within reasonable payback periods are readily available, making scaled
implementation of available technology a priority for the many buildings that have not yet undergone retrofits.
Retrofit implementation strategies vary by building
type and each building’s unique needs. Retrofits for
most building types can include weatherization, smart
thermostats, lighting and appliance replacements, and
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment
upgrades. Industrial buildings that use energy for
manufacturing must explore efficiency opportunities
specific to their specialized equipment and processes.
It is important to prioritize energy efficiency retrofits
prior to electrification and the transition to renewable
energy to lower overall costs and maximize savings. In
addition, these investments make buildings healthier
and more comfortable for people. Efficiency enables
the transition to 100% renewable energy by reducing
the amount of new wind and solar power required to
meet all energy needs.
When strategically designed and executed, workforce
development programs related to energy efficiency and
retrofit investments can create new jobs for priority
populations, expanding the 80,000 clean-energy job
ecosystem in Chicagoland.
“
Prioritize low-income and
minority communities as they will
be negatively affected the most
from climate change and include
policy that prevents gentrification
of these areas so the residents
actually see the benefits rather
than being displaced.
 - Resident of Humboldt Park
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Do retrofit activities provide equitable job training, employment, and
contracting opportunities in priority communities?
□ Will post-retrofit performance be monitored to ensure achievement of
projects’ savings and benefits?
□ Are diverse workforce development, procurement, and contracting
strategies used?
□ In residential buildings, are savings benefiting renters?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Is remediation of non-energy issues such as lead, mold, and indoor air
quality being addressed?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure □ Are designated environmental justice areas or communities with high
pollution burden being prioritized by incentive and financing programs?
□ Do financing options include protections from predatory lending?
□ Is access to affordable housing being maintained or expanded?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Do efficiency strategies improve thermal comfort, indoor air quality,
and resiliency to extreme weather?
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about building retrofit approaches should consider these initial questions
to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
45 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 46
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
Senior and Family Apartment
Retrofits
To increase building resiliency, lower energy costs, and
improve comfort for building residents, the Chicago
Housing Authority (CHA) is working with its senior
living facilities and family apartment buildings to
replace inefficient central heating systems and old hot
water heaters. CHA has completed large-scale ener
-
gy-efficiency projects that replaced outdated systems
in its public housing portfolio, allowing improvements
in more than 10,000 apartments and providing residents
with better comfort and lower energy costs.
Neighborhood Power Project:
Family Matters
Family Matters, a youth development and commu
-
nity leadership nonprofit located in Rogers Park,
participated in the Neighborhood Power Project.
This program, created by Illinois Green Alliance,
Environmental Defense Fund and Elevate in 2020,
provides free consulting services and financial support
to save nonprofit Chicago organizations money by
addressing sustainable building operations and iden
-
tifying retrofit opportunities. Through the support of
utility incentives, rebates, and Neighborhood Power
Project mini-grants, Family Matters was able to retrofit
and upgrade many of their buildings’ critical systems,
which included replacing their natural gas water heater
with a more efficient electric heater, improving boiler
pipe insulation, and installing new LED lighting and
smart thermostats. Thanks to this program, the youth
enrolled in The Family Matters School and afterschool
youth development programs, along with their fami
-
lies, are experiencing greater comfort and the sensory
benefits of a more efficient and customizable learning
environment. In addition, the organization saves money
because of the reduction of water and power use in
the building. As of April 2022, 15 organizations, span
-
ning 11 Chicago neighborhoods, have enrolled in the
Neighborhood Power Project.
 STRATEGY 1
KNOWN HURDLES • Upfront cost barriers for comprehensive
retrofits
• Vendor capabilities, available vendors, and
vendor contracting support
• Variability of industrial building uses • Concerns about equitable benefits of on-bill
financing mechanisms
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Conduct a baseline retrofit assessment to
determine building typologies and commu
-
nity areas for prioritization
• Conduct a landscape analysis of workforce
development opportunities and barriers
• Work with frontline community leaders to
prioritize buildings for energy efficiency
retrofits
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Total number of trained professionals • Number and percentage of buildings retro
-
fitted
• Average utility bill reductions
47 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 48
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
A Retrofit residential buildings with 4 or fewer units:
20% by 2030 and 50% by 2040, prioritizing low- or
moderate-income households
Smaller residential buildings, including the city’s nearly 400,000 single-family homes
and small multifamily properties, generated 14% of the city’s total carbon emissions in
2017. These households can benefit from the same types of retrofits that apply to larger
residential buildings. Bundling simple updates like weatherization, lighting, and appliance
upgrades with the conversion of furnaces, boilers, and air conditioners to advanced heat
pump technology makes it realistic to cut energy use in half, even with Chicago’s hot
summers and cold winters. Nearly 93% of Chicagoans live in this type of building, making
this retrofit action an important aspect of ensuring equitable access to the benefits of the
clean-energy transition. To reach the City’s 2030 goal, 78,500 smaller residential buildings
must be retrofitted, and to reach the City’s 2050 goal, 196,000 smaller residential buildings
must be retrofitted. Achieving equitable retrofit implementation requires that landlords
engage in programs and pass utility savings and comfort to renters.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
CHA, City
Treasurer,
DOB, DOH,
DPD
STRATEGY 1
ACTIONS
C
B
Retrofit 20% of total industrial buildings by
2030
Industrial buildings use large amounts of energy for manufacturing and other processes,
comprising 16.6% of the City’s 2017 carbon footprint. The same energy-intensive industrial
processes can also generate other types of air pollution that directly affect the health of
local residents, illustrating the importance of the role retrofits can play in addressing both
carbon and overall pollution. Unlike other building types, energy retrofits are often highly
specific to each industrial facility and require careful analysis and engineering.
Retrofit 20% of total 5+ unit residential
buildings by 2030
This action will bring improved efficiency and living conditions to nearly 140,000 units
in large multifamily buildings. Utility costs are among the largest operating expenses for
multifamily buildings in Chicago, and this portion of Chicago’s housing stock accounted
for 12.9% of the city’s total carbon footprint in 2017. Large savings from retrofits such as
weatherization (insulation and air sealing), lighting and appliance upgrades, smart thermostat installations, and high-efficiency heating and cooling equipment are well-established,
though paying for these improvements can be an obstacle for landlords. Particularly for
building owners in underserved communities, it is important to address how unfair appraisals,
limited access to capital, and other legacy forces of redlining reinforce barriers to energy
efficiency investments. For renters, efficiency retrofits can help preserve affordable housing
when thoughtfully planned, though they also have the potential to drive rent increases.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
BACP, DOB,
DPD
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
CHA, DOB,
DOH, DPD
49 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 50
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
STRATEGY 1
ACTIONS
(cont.)
ED
Retrofit 20% of total commercial buildings by
2035
Commercial buildings include offices, restaurants, and stores. These facilities accounted
for 23.5% of the city’s carbon footprint in 2017, or nearly as much as residential buildings of
all sizes. Through programs like Retrofit Chicago and utility incentive programs, many large
commercial buildings have already benefited from energy efficiency investments. Spreading
proven efficiency practices to more of the city’s commercial buildings will strengthen busi
-
nesses while reducing cost and GHG emissions. LED lighting retrofits typically provide the
fastest payback period, often within two years. Other retrofits appropriate to commercial
buildings include heating, ventilation, and air conditioning upgrades, adding controls so that
systems can be shut down when not in use, and carefully monitoring energy consumption
for signs of waste or unusual usage.
Retrofit 90% of total city-owned and sister
agency-owned buildings by 2035
City and sister agency buildings include public schools, community centers, libraries,
fire and police stations, offices, and other buildings that serve the public. Although they
generated only 1% of the city’s total carbon footprint in 2017, it is important for the City to
lead by example and bring energy efficiency technology to its own facilities. This action
will expand upon earlier investments in energy efficiency by the City and sister agencies,
including the Retrofit One upgrades pursued in 60 buildings in 2018, and the complete
replacement of all streetlights with LED technology.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
DOB, DPD
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
AIS, CCC,
CDA, CDOT,
Chicago Park
District, CPS,
CTA, DOB,
DPD, DWM,
PBC
51 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 52
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 2
CONNECT COMMUNITIES TO
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Expanding innovative community ownership models
for renewable energy projects on City property and
utilizing state funding will help Chicago achieve 100%
clean renewable energy community-wide by 2035. The
City will support the development of renewable energy
generation to bring the economic and pollution-reduction benefits of renewable energy to Chicago homes
and businesses. Connection to renewable energy can
increase community resiliency and decrease household
energy costs. Community ownership models where
community members own shares of the renewable
energy infrastructure enables residents to generate
income as energy is produced. The City will prioritize
models that expand access to the most energy-burdened households.
“
 Help create BIPOC ownership
of the clean energy economy.
- Resident of East Garfield Park
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about clean-energy approaches should consider these initial questions
to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Does the approach align with existing energy assistance programs and
prioritize reducing energy costs for low-income households?
□ Have documentation requirements for income-eligible benefits been
streamlined?
□ Are diverse workforce development, procurement, and contracting
strategies used?
□ Do new infrastructure development activities provide equitable job
training, employment, and contacting opportunities in priority communities?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Is distributed and local generation prioritized within the approach,
including on remediated brownfield sites?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Are outreach and education strategies holistic and include multilingual
and varied approaches to reach all audiences?
□ Are consumer protections in place to prevent unintended energy costs
and to protect from predatory lending?
□ Do communities hold shared leadership and decision-making in siting
and developing community solar projects?
Community health and
resiliency □ Are sites for community-scale or utility-scale renewable generation
development being evaluated for community impacts and potential
adverse effects?
53 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 54
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 2
KNOWN HURDLES • Vendor capabilities, available vendors, and vendor
contracting support
• Community adoption requires significant education,
outreach, and relationship building
• Needed modifications to Illinois municipal aggre
-
gation law
• Predatory practices by some alternative suppliers • Identifying proper government department ownership • No current formal clean-energy partnership or
programs between the City of Chicago and its elec
-
tric distribution utility
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Assess and evaluate the use of municipal aggregation • Strengthen and establish diverse clean-energy
career development pathways
• Prioritize communities and buildings for solar
deployment
• Develop clear educational materials and compelling
outreach strategy
• Establish robust consumer protections to prevent
predatory supplier behavior
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Total megawatts of community-owned solar proj
-
ects developed
• Total number of community renewable subscrip
-
tions
• Total megawatts of Chicago-based community
renewable energy
55 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 56
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
STRATEGY 2
ACTIONS
A Install 5 megawatts of co-owned community
solar projects by 2025
By 2025, 5 megawatts of co-owned community solar projects will be installed within
city limits, prioritizing households with the highest energy burden. This amount of solar
can power more than 1,100 Chicago homes each year. Community energy infrastructure
owned by individual Chicagoan shareholders brings unique benefits, including protection
from cost instability. Community-owned solar allows residents, including renters, to take
advantage of reduced energy rates and clean energy without having to install or own a
solar array on their property.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
AIS, CCC,
CHA, CPS,
DOB, DPD
C
B
Increase community renewables subscriptions
to achieve 25% subscribed by low-income and/
or environmental justice low-income residents
by 2030
By 2030, the City will increase community renewable subscriptions to achieve a 25%
subscription rate by low-income and/or environmental justice low-income residents.
Community renewable subscriptions allow residents to take advantage of reduced energy
rates and clean energy without having to install or own a solar array on their property. This
expands access to the benefits of solar to both renters and homeowners without suitable
roofs for solar. Providing access to community renewables for low-income or environmental
justice households reduces energy cost burdens.
Increase Chicago-based community renewables
to 20 megawatts by 2025
By 2025, the City will increase Chicago-based community renewables to 20 megawatts.
Expanding access to renewable energy for all Chicagoans starts by building energy infrastructure within the city limits. Community renewables provide all Chicagoans access to
the benefits of renewable generation, including lower electric bills, even if they are unable
to have an on‐site solar system at their home or business. These projects bring tremendous
benefits to Chicago, including cleaner air, reduced energy costs for households, and jobs.
The City will explore all options to host these projects, including City-owned sites and
Chicago-based nonprofit organizations and businesses.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
BACP, DFSS,
DPD
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
BACP, DFSS,
DPD
57 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 58
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
2PILLAR
BUILD CIRCULAR
ECONOMIES TO CREATE
JOBS AND REDUCE WASTE
With more than 2.7 million residents, Chicago generated 4.13 million tons of materials in 2020,
or more than 1.5 tons of waste per person per year. The collection, transportation, processing,
and treatment of solid waste and wastewater account for 7% of Chicago’s GHG emissions.
Many more emissions across the global supply chain are associated with the initial manufacturing of those wasted materials. Reducing waste generation through prevention and diverting
materials from incineration and landfills provides climate, health, and economic benefits.
Between 2018 and 2021, Chicago decreased its annual
waste generation by 200,000 tons each year. The 2022
CAP builds upon this progress and sets forth goals
for the sectors that contribute to generating waste
across the city, including residential, commercial, and
industrial activities.
A more circular materials management system can
provide many benefits to communities. For example,
new businesses might arise that are focused on keeping
food waste out of landfills. By collecting surplus food
and scraps separately for donation or composting,
individuals experiencing food insecurity gain access
to high-quality meals, food growers gain access to
important soil nutrients, and the emissions from
landfilling food waste are avoided. Circular solutions
focused on reducing, reusing, repairing, and recycling
materials can be community-designed to address
hyperlocal needs and concerns with traditional waste
management practices.
Circular economies depend on reverse logistics that
return used materials and products to manufacturers
for processing. Enabling reverse logistics will increase
commercial traffic across all neighborhoods. To support
better air quality and emissions reductions as reverse
logistics infrastructure is built, the City will enable
electrified commercial fleets.
The 2022 CAP aligns with the recommendations made
in the 2021 City of Chicago Materials Management
Strategy. Waste diversion goals are guided by the
following principles:
• Reframe Chicago’s materials as resources, instead
of waste
• Center equity and environmental justice in program
design
• Prioritize initiatives with revenue potential, no/
low cost, or a positive return on investment when
applied at scale
• Equip consumers with the education and tools
needed to drive innovation in evolving waste systems
Nature Based Solutions
1. Composting provides nutrients that support
healthy trees and vegetation.
2. Small-scale wastewater treatment can reduce
runoff and maintain balanced water cycles.
3. Using products made by biological feedstocks
products through regenerative agricultural
practices supports ecosystem health.
4. Reducing single-use products preserves
forests and other ecosystems.
5. Regenerating marshes, sloughs, and wetlands
for stormwater management reduces wastewater treatment energy use.
59 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 60
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 1
REDUCE WASTE AND
LANDFILLING
Acknowledging that reducing overall waste provides
the greatest benefits, it is also important to improve
the convenience and effectiveness of waste management infrastructure, so that it is easier for individuals
and businesses to divert waste from landfills. Reusing
durable materials for as long as possible, improving
recycling rates and addressing contamination issues,
and composting organic waste are key starting points.
Under current conditions, too many residents do not
have access to convenient recycling and composting
infrastructure.
“
 Supporting adaptive reuse
techniques whenever possible,
rather than demolition and
construction.
- Resident of The Loop
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about waste prevention and diversion approaches should consider
these initial questions to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of
their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings □ Are low-income individuals protected from new fees?
□ Do new materials-management infrastructure development and
processes provide equitable job training, employment, and contacting
opportunities in priority communities?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Have hauling routes and fleets been optimized to protect populations
from further pollution burden?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Are reuse and donation opportunities—particularly to ensure that
surplus edible food reaches food-insecure residents—being prioritized
over recycling or composting, when applicable?
□ Are outreach and education strategies holistic and include multilingual
and varied approaches to reach all audiences?
□ Do new approaches focus on gaining support and building awareness in
communities with the lowest waste diversion rates?
Community health and
resiliency □ Do new processing sites (for example, transfer stations, commercial
composting sites, or recycling facilities) cause disproportionate pollution or other negative effects for one community more than others?
61 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 62
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 1
KNOWN HURDLES • Lack of institutional capacity within city and budget
for transitioning from black cart system to more
effective options
• Promoting and evaluating the success of prevention
approaches
• Communicating materials management procedures
effectively with diverse audiences
• Complexity of regulatory structures
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Improve high-density residential recycling ordi
-
nance compliance based on 2020 Chicago Office
of the Inspector General report findings
• Support ambitious statewide extended producer
responsibility legislation
• Leverage Chicago’s participation in the NRDC
(Natural Resources Defense Council) Food Matters
Great Lakes Regional Cohort to pilot food waste
prevention and recycling programs
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Quantity and geographic distribution of community
organic waste collection sites
• Compliance rates of low- and high-density resi
-
dential buildings
• Electronic waste diversion rates
Department of Streets
and Sanitation Launches
Community-Wide Composting
Leveraging the support from the Natural Resources
Defense Council’s Food Matters Program, the
Department of Streets and Sanitation (DSS) will
launch five community organic waste drop-off sites
located at NeighborSpace community gardens. The
five drop-off sites will act as hub locations to accept
organic waste materials and compost materials on-site
from surrounding neighborhood residents. Locations
for the pilot sites will be in Back of the Yards, Pilsen,
Englewood, Old Irving Park, and West Garfield Park
neighborhoods. The project also includes an evaluation
that will help the City achieve the goal of expanding
community composting to more community gardens.
In 2014, commercial composting and recycling pilots
launched at five public schools and today are found
in 14 schools. As of 2021, Chicago Public Schools (CPS)
intends to expand the program to support 24 schools.
The program aims to divert 80% of all cafeteria and
kitchen waste from landfills, while also educating staff
and students on the impacts of waste reduction and
composting.
63 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 64
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
STRATEGY 1
ACTIONS
A Introduce community-wide organic waste
collection and decomposition by 2025
In households and restaurants, food waste is typically the largest portion of the waste
stream. When sent to landfills, food waste causes detrimental methane emissions. When
recovered for donation or composted and returned to the soil as fertilizer, food waste feeds
food-insecure residents, enables growers to produce more healthy food, reduces the need
for irrigation, and prevents flooding during heavy rainfall.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDPH, CPS,
DPD, DSS
C
B
Divert 90% of commercial, industrial, and
institutional waste by 2030
Commercial and industrial waste generation refers to waste generated outside of homes,
including offices, stores, restaurants, large institutions like schools and hospitals, and
factories. These facilities are required by ordinance to contract with private companies
for waste and recycling services, though a 2020 audit by the Inspector General found
many businesses lack recycling capacity. Between 2010 and 2020, Chicago’s commercial
and industrial waste increased from 1.2 million tons in 2010 to almost 1.5 million tons, with
most of this waste ending up in landfills. The largest categories of waste included easily
recyclable materials like cardboard, paper, and food waste that can be transformed into
valuable products like compost. To achieve a 90% diversion goal by 2030, the City will help
commercial and industrial businesses implement new source reduction and prevention
techniques and improve reuse and recycling.
Implement equitable waste source prevention
strategies by 2030
Eliminating waste, particularly by avoiding single-use products, brings many benefits.
These single-use products are the materials most likely to “leak” out of the waste collection
system, causing pollution and negative health effects, clogging stormwater management
systems, and hampering quality of life. Further, manufacturing these materials causes
GHG emissions and other types of pollution, which is an important consideration even
if those effects are mostly felt by people on the other side of the globe. One example of
source elimination is the 2015 plastic bag ordinance, through which the City banned the
use of freely available single-use plastic bags. Exploring the many other alternatives for
single-use items will support this goal, with a particular focus on options that create new
businesses and are cost-neutral or better for consumers and small businesses.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
CDPH, DOB,
DPD, DSS
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
BACP, CDPH,
DOB, DPD,
DSS
65 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 66
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
STRATEGY 1
ACTIONS
(cont.)
D Divert 75% of construction and demolition
waste by 2030
By 2030, the city will divert 75% of construction and demolition waste from landfills and
incineration. Current construction and demolition waste disposal practices contribute
significantly to resource loss through material degradation, increased raw materials
extraction, and increased waste transportation emissions. When building materials are
sent to landfills instead of being reused, an additional carbon impact occurs because of the
need to spend energy on manufacturing replacement materials. Deconstruction, compared
to demolition, preserves materials for reuse and is less likely to cause air quality harm.
Improved business practices to ensure that salvageable materials are identified and removed
for reuse instead of being incinerated or disposed of will be key to this action’s success.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
CDPH, DOB,
DPD, DSS
F
E
Divert 90% of residential waste by 2040
Smaller residential buildings in Chicago are currently served by the City’s Blue and Black
Cart Programs for recycling and garbage. The programs rely on individuals placing materials
in the correct bin. Mistakes cause contamination, add to processing costs, and ultimately
lead to many recyclables ending up in the landfill. In larger multifamily buildings, landlords
are responsible for providing recycling services for residents. Some may not be in compliance or may use a hauler with confusing rules around which materials can be recycled.
In both cases, access to composting services is rare unless individuals go out of their way
to find options. This patchwork of practices creates challenges and can be improved by
standardizing recycling practices and expanding composting options.
Enable building design for disassembly and
reuse by 2035
When materials are reused, they are kept out of landfills and new material manufacturing is
avoided. Buildings that are slated for demolition are filled with thousands of useful materials,
though only highly valuable or easily recoverable materials are typically salvaged. Buildings
can be designed as high performing and durable modular material assemblies that can be
easily deconstructed by skilled professionals. Once disassembled, material assemblies can
be installed in new projects. Disassembly and reuse eliminate waste and enable building
spaces to change to meet evolving occupant needs. It also protects neighbors from dust,
debris, and other harmful effects of less-controlled demolitions.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
CDPH, DOB,
DPD, DSS
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
DOB, DPD
67 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 68
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
3PILLAR
DELIVER A ROBUST ZEROEMISSION MOBILITY
NETWORK THAT CONNECTS
COMMUNITIES AND
IMPROVES AIR QUALITY
All Chicagoans need equitable access to safe, reliable, and affordable clean trans
-
portation choices. This is especially true in Black and Brown communities that
experience longer commute times, have less access to transit, and pay more for
transportation. There is an opportunity to align and build upon the 2022 CAP
goals with CDOT’s strategic plan, which aims to connect people of every age
and physical ability in every neighborhood while also systematically reducing
transportation costs, breaking the cycle of intergenerational poverty, and making
geographic, social, and economic mobility possible.
The commitment to equity and the health of
Chicagoans that guides the 2022 CAP requires
looking at how transportation contributes to
pollution and the negative health impacts that
trucks, cars, buses, and their emissions have on
residents. It also requires investment in infra
-
structure improvements that prioritize walking,
biking, and transit use to reduce emissions
and fatalities from car trips, planting trees to
increase shade in neighborhoods to reduce
the urban heat island effect, and designing and
building streets that reduce stormwater runoff
and mitigate flooding. Steps must be taken
to address structural inequities that prevent
investments from reaching Black and Brown
neighborhoods and look at how our invest
-
ments can bring out the best in our city.
On-road transportation accounts for 15% of
total citywide GHG emissions. Reducing these
emissions requires that Chicagoans travel fewer
miles in fossil-fuel-burning vehicles and shift
to lower-emission transportation options like
walking, biking, or transit. More efficient travel
is key as well, as to avoid emissions that result
from traffic on congested roads. To achieve this
goal, neighborhoods will be connected with
sidewalks, bike paths, and public transit that
residents of every age and ability can navigate.
City processes must also evolve to place higher
priority on road repair, street lighting, and
sidewalk construction that targets the most
disconnected neighborhoods. Policies must
enable clean transportation options and enable
zero-emission transit, freight, and personal
vehicles. Better data and reporting must be
publicly available to measure progress toward
delivering equitable access to safe, reliable, and
affordable clean transportation.
Nature Based Solutions
1. Some parking areas, sidewalks, roads,
and bike lanes can be paved with
permeable surfaces to avoid runoff and
support balanced water cycles.
2. Tree and forest buffers along highways
and transportation corridors reduce
heat islands, air pollution, and noise.
3. Streetscapes and parking lots can
be explored for vegetated planters,
bioswales, and rain gardens.
69 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 70
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 1
MAKE WALKING, BIKING, OR
TRANSIT VIABLE OPTIONS FOR
ALL TRIPS
Virtually every Chicagoan must navigate the city’s roads
and sidewalks as part of their transit journey. Streets
that are safe to cross and sidewalks that are maneuverable and wide enough to accommodate a wheelchair or
stroller are necessary preconditions for a livable and
well-connected communities. Every neighborhood
should have streets with the necessary infrastructure
to ensure safe and comfortable travel for everyone.
Sidewalk condition assessments must be conducted,
prioritizing historically underserved communities. Poor
quality sidewalks must be improved, and new sidewalks
must be added where they are missing. Crosswalks and
curb ramps at transit stops and other priority locations
will continue to be installed or enhanced.
Continuing to make cycling a greater part of how we get around in Chicago requires a biking network that serves
all neighborhoods and makes everyday bicycling safe and convenient for people of all ages and abilities. Biking
must feel safe, in addition to being statistically safe. The City aims to make cyclists feel safe and experience a
low level of traffic stress. The network of protected lanes, neighborhood greenways, and off-street trails will
continue to grow citywide, and traffic flows will continue to be evaluated to optimize bike routes for safety
and convenience.
To ensure that walking, biking, and transit use remain viable for all trips, the City must prioritize sidewalk and
road maintenance by using an equity lens along with condition assessments to address historic imbalances
in the upkeep of City infrastructure. Continued coordination between CTA, Metra, and PACE is also critical to
enable riders to use all three systems as a seamless transit network.
“
 A network of fully protected
bike lanes throughout the city.
- Resident of Albany Park
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about personal mobility and transit approaches should consider these initial questions
to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Are low-income households being prioritized for incentive programs
(such as subsidized access)?
Reduced pollution
burden □ Are designated environmental justice areas or communities with
high pollution burden being prioritized for infrastructure expansion
programs?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure □ Are communities with lower levels of existing infrastructure investments and maintenance activities being prioritized?
□ Are outreach and education strategies (such as learn-to-ride classes)
holistic and include multilingual and varied approaches to reach all
audiences?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Is the approach a priority based on community mobility needs assessments?
71 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 72
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 1
KNOWN HURDLES • Time-intensive nature of network planning to seek
meaningful input from community stakeholders
• Funding for total system completion • Acceptance of bike lanes • Sidewalk quality data • Biking network, while in progress, has gaps
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Evaluate effectiveness of e-bike charging stations • Complete 50 miles of bike lane network expansion
with a focus on South/West Sides
• Establish a framework for Neighborhood Bike
Network planning and begin the process in three
West Side communities
• Implement CDOT Strategic Plan • Conduct and publicly report sidewalk condition
assessments
• Establish transit mode measurement and reporting • Install 200 (total) new Divvy bike stations on the
South, Southwest, West, and Northwest Sides
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Daily Divvy bike trips of 1.5 per 1,000 residents in
five economic hardship areas from May to October
• Miles of protected bike lanes • Miles of total bike lanes • Miles of off-street trails • Transportation mode distribution • Sidewalk quality indicators
Trail Extension
In March 2022, Chicago’s Department of Transportation
(CDOT), Department of Planning and Development
(DPD), and Chicago Park District (CPD) unveiled a new
citywide vision for connected trails and corridors. This
plan, backed by more than $15 million in funding, will
connect transit, housing, and parks citywide to create
new outdoor offerings and aims to catalyze commu
-
nity investment. Working closely with community
stakeholders, the leadership committee will iden
-
tify funding opportunities, organize federal grants,
and construct over 48 miles of new assets. This vision
will enact anti-displacement strategies and prioritize
regions that have been marginalized or forgotten in
green space planning. Overall, these extensions will
enhance connectivity and mobility throughout the
region and improve the biking and pedestrian expe
-
rience in many neighborhoods.
Southwest Collective: Green
Spaces
Local nonprofit, Southwest Collective, works with resi
-
dents and community groups on Chicago’s Southwest
Side to identify and address environmental justice and
equity issues. By creating community gardens, library
boxes in the parks and educational outreach, tree
planting and bicycle accessibility, Southwest Collection
educates communities about the need for additional
green spaces, walkable streets, clean air, and alternative
transit options.
73 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 74
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
STRATEGY 1
ACTIONS
A Expand high-quality and low-stress on-street
bikeways and off-street trails
Chicago’s bikeways network includes 345 miles of on-street facilities, in addition to 55 miles
of off-street trails such as the Lakefront Trail and Major Taylor Trail. Through the Chicago
Works program, the City has significantly increased its construction of low-stress bikeways,
including both protected bike lanes and neighborhood greenways. These facilities provide
an increased level of comfort for people biking by providing both physical and network
separation from traffic speed and volume. To continue improving community mobility and
support citywide transportation emissions reductions, by the end of 2024 the City aims to
add 25 more miles of protected bike lanes, 25 more miles of neighborhood greenways, and
meet the CDOT Strategic Plan goal of eliminating 15 miles of gaps in the citywide bikeways
network. Through these and other investments that support community cycling, by 2030
the City aims to double current biking rates to achieve a reduction in motor vehicle miles
traveled by 50 million miles annually.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDOT, DPD
C
B
Enable Chicagoans to walk, bike, take transit, or use
shared micromobility for 45% of all trips by 2040
Decreasing the number of miles traveled by a vehicle, and in particular reducing single-occupancy vehicle trips, presents as significant opportunity to reduce Chicago’s transportation emissions. In 2017, on-road transportation generated 63% of all transportation GHG
emissions (and 15% of total, citywide GHG emissions). Strategies and actions that focus
on making roads and sidewalks safer for all users will make the city more walkable, bikeable, and transit friendly. Currently, it is estimated that walking, biking, and transit-riding
account for 36.5% of commuting trips in Chicago. The City will invest in the lowest carbon
and highest efficiency modes of transportation to increase walking, biking, transit, and
shared micro-mobility use to 45% of all trips by 2040, and should continue to measure
how various modes are used to evaluate the effectiveness of its strategies to increase the
use of these lower-carbon modes of travel. From 2022 through 2024, the City intends to
meet the CDOT Strategic Plan goals of designing and installing bus priority treatments
along three corridors. The City will also complete the Better Streets for Buses Study and
continue to invest in planning and designing additional corridors for bus priority treatments
to support high-quality bus service. Between 2025 and 2040, the City will continue to set
annual benchmarks for infrastructure investments in protected bike lanes, neighborhood
greenways, vision zero safety improvements and transit priority treatments that facilitate
additional non-car trips and help meet the 45% mode-share goal by 2040.
Increase Divvy bikes and shared micromobility
trips 30% by 2030
Chicago’s Divvy Bikes service is the largest bike-share program in the United States. Over
5.5 million Divvy bike rides were taken in 2021—a 60% increase over 2020 ridership (3.4
million rides) and a 44% increase over 2019 ridership (3.81 million rides). Over 200 new
Divvy bike stations will be delivered to the South, Southwest, West, and Northwest Sides.
By the end of 2022, the Divvy bike network will expand to serve the entire city with 16,500
bikes. The City targets achieving a ridership of at least 1.5 Divvy bike trips per day from
May to October for every thousand residents in five economic hardship areas (identified
via census and public health data). Increasing Divvy bike ridership to reduce vehicle miles
traveled by 2.2 million miles will improve city air quality, public health, and reduce citywide
transportation emissions.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
CDOT, CTA,
DPD
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDOT
75 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 76
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 2
INCREASE TRANSIT PERFORMANCE
AND ENCOURAGE EQUITABLE
TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT
Whether traveling within your neighborhood or crisscrossing the city for a longer adventure, reliable transit
plays a vital role in keeping our city connected. Despite
the dramatic decrease in ridership, the COVID-19
pandemic proved that public transit is a critical part
of an equitable economy and must be preserved and
expanded. By increasing access to reliable transit,
Chicagoans can reduce the number or distance of
vehicle trips and related emissions. It can also help
Chicagoans pursue work opportunities in more locations. Walkable neighborhoods, accessible sidewalks,
and transit-supportive improvements on key bus and
rail corridors will increase transit ridership, reduce
congestion and travel times, and improve air quality.
“
 Increasing pedestrian safety
and comfort in transitional areas,
e.g. improving walkability under
highways, over bridges, etc. in
order to link neighborhoods and
encourage walking and biking.
- Resident of Avondale
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about transit approaches should consider these initial questions to
improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Are low-income households being prioritized for incentive programs,
such as subsidized access?
Reduced pollution
burden □ Are designated environmental justice areas or communities with
high pollution burden being prioritized for infrastructure expansion
programs?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Is there a plan for measuring and reporting access to safe, reliable, and
affordable clean transportation choices by zip code?
□ Are outreach and education strategies such as learn-to-ride classes
holistic and include multilingual and varied approaches to reach all
audiences?
□ Is there a plan to preserve or expand housing affordability near transit,
including proactively mitigating the risk of displacement?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Is the approach a priority based on community mobility needs assessments?
77 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 78
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 2
KNOWN HURDLES • The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and shifts to
remote working have reduced transit ridership
• Reliable charging infrastructure and updated main
-
tenance protocols are needed for electric buses
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Establish transportation mode measurement and
reporting
• Complete CDOT’s Congestion Pricing and Mobility
Study
• Expand electric buses to additional routes
PERFORMANCE METRICS • CTA ridership • Transportation mode distribution • Total number of electric buses • Total miles and percentage of transit miles traveled
by electric buses
A Year-Round Healthy Food
Incubator: Food Matters
To help spur commercial development around transit
corridors in underserved areas and provide residents
with healthy, affordable access to food, Food Matters
is constructing a healthy food incubator at 435 East
43rd Street near the Green Line. The City’s equitable
transit-oriented development (ETOD) pilot program
awarded Food Matters $15,000 in October 2021 to
support implementation. This incubator will have
a year-round farmers market, shared commercial
kitchens, and a community gathering space centered
around nutrition and access. Food Matters envisions
future spaces like this around the city to provide
residents with year-round access to fresh food and
produce.
79 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 80
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
STRATEGY 2
ACTIONS
A Update land use policies to encourage
sustainable development, accessibility, and
street safety by 2023
Chicago has the country’s second-largest public transportation system, with 8 train lines
and 129 bus routes. Encouraging equitable development near transit nodes to make more
households and businesses transit-accessible will make it easier for residents, workers,
and visitors to use transit for all trips. Equitable Transit-Oriented Development (ETOD)
leverages planning and development as a strategy to reduce vehicle miles traveled and
GHG emissions. Existing zoning rules mandate excessive and costly parking and restrict
building density. The City’s current Transit-Oriented Development Ordinance incentivizes pedestrian-oriented development through offering voluntary parking reductions and
density bonuses in transit-served locations. Chicago can expand and strengthen this land
use policy to apply across the city more equitably and to promote a diversity of housing
options and mixed-use developments near transit.
Access to public transit is most useful if people can safely and comfortably reach transit
stops. Unfortunately, sidewalk interruptions, poor lighting, or unwelcoming or vacant
storefronts on streets near transit cause people to hesitate to use, or avoid, transit. Many
Chicagoans—especially seniors, people with disabilities, families, and children—express
feeling unsafe when walking to and from transit due to vehicles that interrupt pedestrian
ways while using driveways or drive-throughs, for example. Ensuring that new developments prioritize pedestrian safety and accessibility—especially near transit—is critical to
making it easier to live car-free or car-lite and thereby reduce GHG emissions.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
CDOT, CTA,
DOH, DPD
C
B
Require transportation demand management
plans for new development by 2025
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) plans encourage the use of transit, bikes, and
reduce single-occupancy vehicle trips while also reducing traffic congestion and associated
emissions. By requiring or incentivizing new larger development to develop TDM plans, our
planning and development strategies can intentionally support sustainable transportation
and local ETOD policy implementation.
Expand use of commuter benefits by 2024
Providing incentives for workers to take transit can increase transit ridership. Several
cities require or encourage some companies to provide pre-tax commuter benefits to their
employees. While traditional programs also provide car-centered incentives, modernizing
program offerings can encourage commuters to consider ways to drive less and utilize
transit and low-carbon mobility options. By encouraging greater utilization of transit
benefits, Chicago’s business community can actively partner in increasing ridership to
pre-pandemic levels and stabilize investment in this critical infrastructure for Chicago.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDOT, DPD
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
BACP, CDOT,
CTA
81 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 82
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
D Update citywide car and bike parking
requirements by 2025
The current zoning code parking minimums mandate that new developments build on-site
car parking spaces based on 2004 zoning policy standards. These mandates frequently
lead to an oversupply of off-street parking, which unnecessarily encourages more residents to drive, increasing vehicle miles traveled and GHG emissions. Chicago will use
this opportunity to modernize parking standards to establish a better balance between
all transportation modes (including biking and micromobility options) and make the city
safer for pedestrians. Updated car and bike parking regulations will be critical to meeting
the City’s climate goals.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
CDOT, DPD
STRATEGY 2
ACTIONS
(cont.)
E Increase CTA ridership 20% by 2030
When Chicagoans use more sustainable transportation modes, the number of miles traveled
by vehicles will decrease and reduce GHG emissions. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic,
however, has created many challenges, including for transit. Health and safety protocols
have kept many Chicagoans at home and off transit. Total CTA rail ridership for 2019 was
455.7 million, including 237.3 million bus rides and 218.4 million rail rides. Ridership fell
57.6% in 2020; CTA bus and rail ridership totaled 197.5 million in 2020, including 121.5 million
bus rides and 76.0 million rail rides. The 20% increase that this action targets is based on
pre-pandemic ridership (2019) though. CTA ridership must first rebound to pre-pandemic
ridership levels before increasing. The City is committed to prioritizing citywide clean
transit and incentivizing its use.
Increasing CTA ridership will require sustained investment in infrastructure and service
improvements to make it more competitive to driving and to ensure a convenient, affordable, and safe option for all residents. A suite of policies will be implemented to reduce
single-occupancy vehicle trips. These policies will improve transit comfort and reliability
through priority bus lanes, transit stops, and signals, and the consideration of congestion
pricing. The City will require or enable new larger developments to proactively encourage
sustainable transportation use through Transportation Demand Management (TDM) plans.
Studies show that TDM plans can reduce the number of miles traveled by residents using
a vehicle by up to 20% in these new developments. This action aligns with the City’s ETOD
Policy Plan. The City will also explore transit subsidies to enable overburdened residents
to access transit options. Moreover, the City will implement new ways to measure how
people move through Chicago to reliably track progress toward ridership goals.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
CDOT, CTA,
DPD
83 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 84
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 3
ENABLE ZERO-EMISSION TRANSIT
AND FLEETS
In 1883, Chicago’s elevated train became the world’s
first electrified elevated train and is still powered by
electricity. Zero-emission transit options are necessary
to curbing emissions and improving local air quality.
It is equally important to determine how to maximize
the use of clean renewable energy power for electrified
trains and buses to eliminate the broader inventory of
carbon emissions from this sector.
Shifting to electric taxis, ride hail fleet, and City vehicles
will replace approximately 50,000 combustion-engine
vehicles. The equitable expansion and distribution of
charging stations will enable more residents to benefit
from electric vehicle use. This fleet electrification will
reduce citywide emissions, reduce vehicle operating
and maintenance costs, and improve air quality across
the city.
“
 Reduce diesel trucks in residential areas. Eliminate toxic
pollution or companies that emit
them.
- Resident of Little Village
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about transit approaches should consider these initial questions to
improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Are low-income households being prioritized for incentive programs,
such as subsidized access?
□ Are individual drivers protected from bearing the cost of electric vehicle
conversion?
□ Do new infrastructure development and retrofit activities provide equitable job training, employment, and contacting opportunities in priority
communities?
Reduced pollution
burden □ Are designated environmental justice areas or communities with
high pollution burden being prioritized for infrastructure expansion
programs, such as communities overburdened by intensive truck
traffic?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Are small businesses supported in transitioning to electric vehicles,
such as by low-cost financing?
□ Does this investment or installation support beneficial electrification?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Is the approach a priority based on community mobility needs assessments?
85 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 86
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 3
KNOWN HURDLES • Incremental cost of electric vehicles • Availability of commercialized electric vehicle prod
-
ucts for each vehicle use case
• No existing mechanisms to benchmark or monitor
transition by industry or commercial building
owners
• Diverse types of municipal fleet vehicles • Financial burden of ride-hail vehicle owners to
replace and maintain electric vehicles
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Access to regulatory options to require fleet elec
-
trification
• Develop fleet electrification plan, including various
vehicle types in the municipal fleet
• Conduct commercial loading dock electrification
study
• Prioritize existing buildings for loading dock elec
-
trification
• Explore feasibility and impact of electrified cargo
bike delivery
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Percentage of zero-emission vehicles fleets • Total miles and percentage of miles traveled by
zero-emission transit and transportation
• Number and percentage of loading docks equipped
with electric vehicle chargers
Chicago Transit Authority Fleet
Electrification
In February 2022, CTA released Charging Forward,
its strategic plan for achieving full bus system elec
-
trification by 2040. Charging Forward will serve as a
comprehensive roadmap to guide the bus replace
-
ment schedule, garage modernization timeline, and
charging infrastructure installation projects required
for complete electric transition. CTA plans to priori
-
tize early adoption among its bus routes and garages
on the West and South Sides of Chicago. Bringing
the environmental benefits of electric buses to these
neighborhoods will help mitigate air quality issues
and provide more consistent transportation services.
Electric buses are in service on the Chicago Avenue
route #66.
87 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 88
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
STRATEGY 3
ACTIONS
A Enable electric freight loading docks at commercial
and industrial buildings, addressing new buildings
by 2025 and existing buildings by 2030
All electric vehicles, including freight vehicles, have range limits and require periodic
charging. A robust vehicle charging infrastructure is needed across the city to make freight
vehicle electrification feasible. Loading docks across the city’s commercial and industrial
buildings are important nodes that will create an electric vehicle charging network. For
new buildings, electric vehicle chargers must be considered during initial design and
construction stages where implementation is easiest and most cost-effective. Existing
commercial and industrial buildings must be evaluated for loading dock electrification
feasibility. Some buildings may require electrical service upgrades to handle added load
or improved structural support for charging equipment.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
CDOT, DOB,
DPD
C
B
Enable 100% electrification of delivery fleets by
2035
The last miles that packages travel from distribution centers to homes and businesses create
significant GHG emissions and street-level air pollution. As online commerce increases, so
too will delivery truck traffic. Major delivery companies, including FedEx, UPS, and Amazon
have all committed to delivering 100% zero-emission fleets. The City will enable fleet electrification to ensure these providers and others to meet their fleet electrification targets.
Support equitable electrification of ride-hail and
taxi fleets by 2030
Both Uber and Lyft have committed to transition to zero-emission fleets by 2030. The
federal Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act includes $7.5 billion for electric vehicles. By
2030, electric vehicle sales are expected to reach 50% of total US vehicle sales. The time
to transition to electric vehicles is now. Ride-hail and taxi fleet electrification will reduce
citywide emissions, reduce fuel costs for ride hail and taxi drivers, and improve air quality
across the city.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
BACP, CDOT
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
BACP, CDOT
89 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 90
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
STRATEGY 3
ACTIONS
(cont.)
ED
Achieve zero-emission transit fleets across
Chicagoland by 2040
In 2014, CTA was the first large transit agency in the United States to pilot electric buses.
In 2019, the CTA committed to electrifying its entire bus fleet by 2040. Today, the #66
Chicago route carries passengers on its electric buses, and further investment in the bus
fleet charging infrastructure will enable CTA to expand the number of electric buses across
their routes. New e-buses will be phased into CTA’s fleet to replace older buses. CTA bus
fleet electrification will reduce citywide GHG emissions and improve air quality across the
city. To learn more about the opportunities and strategies of the electrification process,
explore Charging Forward: CTA Bus Electrification Planning Report.
Metra and PACE both aim to operate zero-emission fleets by 2040. Metra is exploring more
efficient locomotives and battery electric-powered switch engines. PACE is modeling its
routes to evaluate the feasibility of bus electrification.
Electrify 100% of the City’s fleet by 2035
With a fleet of more than 9,400 vehicles serviced at 13 maintenance facilities and 11 fuel
sites citywide, the City has an opportunity to leverage an institutional process to alleviate
inequitable pollution burdens. As the Department of Assets, Information and Services (AIS)
continues to invest in its Green Fleet and the electrification of the city fleet, the depart
-
ment is practicing equity through beneficial electrification. By prioritizing the installation
of chargers and conversion of vehicles in community areas experiencing higher air quality
vulnerability, this standard procurement is being leveraged to create jobs, reduce emissions,
and improve health and well-being. Currently, AIS is projected to convert 182 light-duty
vehicles (25% of its fleet) by 2023. The City continues to explore technical and financial
support for the transition of medium- and heavy-duty vehicles, such as street sweepers
and snowplows.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
CTA, DOB,
DPD, Metra,
PACE
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
AIS, CDOT,
CPS
91 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 92
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
4PILLAR
DRIVE EQUITABLE
DEVELOPMENT OF
CHICAGO’S CLEANENERGY FUTURE
As the effects of climate change grow more serious, decreasing reliance on fossil fuels is crit
-
ical to reducing emissions and mitigating climate-related impacts. In 2017, more than 42% of
Chicago’s GHG footprint came from electricity consumption. Coal and natural gas generate
more than half of the electricity on the regional grid that serves Chicago. Transitioning from
these sources to 100% renewable energy will dramatically reduce citywide emissions and
improve regional air quality. It is imperative that these investments and programs be struc
-
tured to maximize community-level benefits and prioritize residents who have historically
experienced energy burden, pollution burden, and/or other systemic burdens.
Renewable energy is naturally replenishing, virtually
inexhaustible, and emissions-free. It can also increase
the reliability and resiliency of the electric grid. Like
all power sources, wind and solar do not operate 100%
of the time. But their flexibility and predictability can
increase grid stability when equipment is designed
to withstand a broad range of weather conditions.
Combining renewable energy with energy storage
further enhances power reliability. Community energy
resiliency from local renewable energy generation
will help Chicagoans withstand severe weather and
power-loss events.
Solar and wind power are the cheapest sources of
electricity today. By expanding community-owned
solar projects, investing in regional renewable energy
generation, and increasing accessibility and afford
-
ability for low-income communities, Chicagoans who
pay for electricity, whether directly or indirectly, can
save money. Installing local renewable energy will also
spur economic growth and create career development
opportunities.
Chicago is well-positioned to access federal, state,
and local funding to achieve our ambitious renewable
energy goals. In Illinois, the Climate and Equitable Jobs
Act (CEJA) commits the state to deliver 100% carbonfree power by 2045 and 100% clean energy by 2050. In
Chicago, a $188 million Climate Bond has been invested
as down payment on climate resiliency and mitigation.
Funds will provide the city’s underserved commu
-
nities with resilient infrastructure and green work
-
force development opportunities. The $1.887 billion
Chicago Recovery Plan includes budget for climate
action, specifically including funding for environmental
justice ($86.8 million), community climate investments
($101.3 million), community development ($166 million),
and small business and workforce support ($87 million).
In partnership with several Chicago-based renewable
providers, the City can use this funding to create energy
resiliency in our communities and ready our city for
the future.
Nature Based Solutions
1. Utilize permeable surfaces such as low, no-mow
native grasses and vegetation, to reduce runoff,
support pollinators, and protect balanced
water cycles where solar power installations
are placed in Chicago or as part of any off-site
power purchase agreement.
93 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 94
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 1
100% CLEAN
RENEWABLE ENERGY
We can make our electric grid “cleaner” and enhance
power reliability by investing in the development of
new renewable energy generation sources and storage.
Installing and expanding in-city and in-state renewable
energy will spur economic growth and create employment opportunities. As the renewable electricity supply
grows, highly polluting fossil-fuel electricity plants can
be retired and remediated. As Chicago electrifies its
buildings and vehicles, powering these systems with
renewable energy will clean our air while reducing
the impact on the climate. Installing renewable projects on city property and utilizing state funding will
help Chicago achieve its goal to achieve 100% clean,
renewable energy community-wide by 2035. While it
is not realistic for dense urban cities like Chicago to
produce all their energy within city limits, utility-scale
renewable developments located outside the city can
still deliver benefits for Chicagoans, such as cost savings
or workforce development opportunities. When done
thoughtfully, developing new clean-energy sources
can help underserved communities by creating highquality jobs and reducing household energy burden.
“
Using our city’s commitments
to launch clean energy projects
close to home and create local,
good paying jobs for Chicagoans.
-Resident of Bronzeville
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about clean-energy approaches should consider these initial questions
to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Does the approach align with existing energy assistance programs and
prioritize reducing energy costs for low-income households?
□ Have documentation requirements for income-eligible benefits been
streamlined?
□ Are diverse workforce development, procurement, and contracting
strategies used?
□ Do new infrastructure development activities provide equitable job
training, employment, and contracting opportunities in priority
communities?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Is distributed and local generation prioritized within the approach,
including on remediated brownfield sites?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Are outreach and education strategies holistic and include multilingual
and varied approaches to reach all audiences?
□ Are consumer protections in place, including preventing rate increases
and protections from predatory lending?
□ Do communities hold shared leadership and decision-making in siting
and developing community solar projects?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Are sites for community-scale or utility-scale renewable generation
development being evaluated for community impacts and potential
adverse effects?
□ Do long-term power purchase agreements with renewable developments located outside of Chicago include community investment benefits for Chicagoans?
95 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 96
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 1
KNOWN HURDLES • Vendor capabilities, available vendors, and vendor
contracting support
• Community adoption requires significant education,
outreach, and relationship building
• Identifying proper government department owner
-
ship
• No current formal clean-energy partnership or
programs between the City and its electric utility
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Assess and evaluate the use of municipal aggregation • Strengthen and establish diverse clean-energy
career development pathways
• Finalize electricity supply agreement to meet munic
-
ipal power needs with 100% renewable energy
• Prioritize communities and buildings for solar
deployment
• Develop clear educational materials and compelling
outreach strategy
• Establish robust consumer protections to prevent
predatory supplier behavior
• Finalize new Electricity Franchise Agreement and
Energy and Equity Agreement with an electricity
distribution utility
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Percentage of clean, renewable energy supplied
to the City
• Total megawatts of clean, renewable energy devel
-
oped within a 250-mile radius of the City
• Total megawatts of clean, renewable energy installed
on City property
Chicago Public Schools Goes
Solar!
In January 2021, CPS established the CPS Goes Solar!
project, which aims to achieve 100% renewable energy
electricity consumption by 2025. This would reduce
GHG emissions from fuel combustion and purchased
energy by 45% by 2030 and 100% by 2050. The project
also aims to educate students and staff on the benefits
and impacts of solar installations on school roofs. CPS
leads this project and has partnered with a robust
technical committee of for-profit and nonprofit organi
-
zations for implementation support. Beyond GHG emis
-
sions reductions, CPS Goes Solar! could also reduce
operating costs by 25%, which would save taxpayer
money and further improve the energy resiliency of
CPS schools.
97 CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 98
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 1
ACTIONS
A Aggregate 5,000 megawatts of clean renewable
energy within a 250-mile radius of Chicago by 2030
By 2030, Chicago will bolster its relationships with surrounding counties to promote
the growth of clean renewable energy, aligned with Illinois’ goal of reaching 100% clean
energy statewide by 2050. To achieve Chicago’s goal of 100% clean renewable energy, the
City will need to enable installations outside Chicagoland. Because of economies of scale,
utility-scale development that leverages state and federal funding is important for making
clean energy affordable. Chicago will boost the regional clean-energy economy and improve
air quality by focusing on development within a 250-mile radius of the city. This amount
of clean energy can power more than 1.1 million Chicago homes each year.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
AIS, DPD
C
B
Achieve 100% clean renewable energy communitywide by 2035
By 2035, the City will work with utilities to provide 100% clean renewable energy community-wide. The City will prioritize local generation and provide communities shared leadership in determining where renewable projects are constructed. The transition to a cleaner
future will help the City reduce carbon emissions, improve air quality, increase economic
opportunities, and build a more resiliency energy grid.
Install 30 megawatts of clean renewable energy
projects on City property by 2030
The City will lead by example in the transition to clean energy by taking advantage of its
physical assets. Installing solar arrays on City-owned properties will ensure that previously
underutilized space can reduce energy costs, increase local job opportunities, and improve
citywide energy resiliency. As a first step, the City will work with technical consultants and
utility partners to assess the feasibility of installing solar arrays on City-owned properties,
prioritizing installations in environmental justice and low-income communities.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
AIS, CCC,
CHA, CPS,
DOB, DPD
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
AIS, CCC,
CHA, CPS,
DOB, DPD
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 99 100
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 2
ENABLE BUILDING AND PERSONAL
VEHICLE ELECTRIFICATION
Many buildings use natural gas to run furnaces, boilers,
hot water heaters, cooking ranges, and other equipment
and appliances. Diesel is commonly used in the backup
generators that help maintain power if the electric
grid is down. Most personal vehicles still use gasoline.
Electrification refers to transitioning away from direct
fossil-fuel combustion in equipment and vehicles by
replacing fossil-fuel-powered equipment with alternatives that run on electricity. When paired with renewable electricity, equipment electrification significantly
reduces GHG emissions. Beyond the carbon benefit,
electrification is also important for improving air quality,
including inside homes. At present, electric-powered
equipment and vehicles are occasionally more expensive than fossil-fuel options. Therefore, it is important
to improve efficiency at the same time to make the
transition affordable.
“
Home electrification would
have two major benefits for
Chicagoans. When paired with
clean renewable energy, electrification is a huge decarbonization
driver. It also has a second benefit
of improving air quality inside
homes.
- Resident of Uptown
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice Considerations
Those making decisions about electrification approaches should consider these initial questions to improve
the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Do retrofit activities provide equitable job training, employment, and
contracting opportunities in priority communities?
□ Are diverse workforce development, procurement, and contracting strategies used?
□ In residential buildings, are savings benefiting renters?
□ Are building efficiency retrofits being combined with electrification to
ensure long-term affordability?
□ Is the impact on energy bills being assessed prior to retrofits to inform residents and enable subsidies for low-income households?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Is remediation of non-energy issues such as lead, mold, and indoor air
quality being addressed?
□ Are facilities with fuels that contribute the most to adverse health impacts
being prioritized, such as those that have fuel combustion within living
spaces or frequently use diesel generators?
□ Are designated environmental justice areas or communities with high pollution burden being prioritized by incentive and financing programs?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Do financing options include protections from predatory lending?
□ Is access to affordable housing being maintained or expanded?
□ Are vehicle electrification approaches designed to ensure equitable distribution of charging stations, including public areas, multifamily housing, and
areas of interest?
□ Are outreach and education strategies holistic and include multilingual and
varied approaches to reach all audiences?
Community health
and resiliency
□ Do building electrification strategies improve thermal comfort, indoor air
quality, and resiliency to extreme weather?
□ Are vehicle electrification approaches a priority based on community
mobility needs assessments?
□ Is community-designed and community-led programming and education
being invested in?
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 101 102
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
STRATEGY 2
KNOWN HURDLES • Vendor capabilities, available vendors, and vendor
contracting support
• Affordability protections • Lack of scalable technology and system reliability
planning
• Buy America requirements for federal funding
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Develop educational materials for communities • Work with frontline community leaders to prioritize
buildings for electrification
• Establish robust consumer protections • Release charging station implementation priorities
and plan
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Total number of trained professionals • Total and percentage of buildings electrified • Number and capacity of charging stations installed
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 103 104
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 2
ACTIONS
A Enact policies that support electrified
renovations and new construction by 2023
By 2023, the City will enable electrified renovations for all existing building types (residential, commercial, and industrial) and new construction. For existing buildings, incentivizing
electrified renovations will not only help the City achieve its climate goals, but will also
standardize building performance and provide clear benefits to owners and occupants.
For new buildings, the transition to all-electric buildings must begin in initial design
and construction stages where it is easiest and most cost-effective. Electrified buildings
can lower energy costs, improve occupant comfort and healthier air quality, and reduce
GHG emissions. Enacting electrification incentives will send a strong signal to Chicago’s
construction workforce that they need to prepare for a rapid transition to all electric
appliances and equipment. Additionally, this policy can ensure that all building types will
benefit from electrification.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
BACP, CDOT,
DOB, DPD
C
B
Electrify 20% of total existing industrial
buildings by 2035
In industrial buildings, fuel-intense processes are often related to heat generation for drying,
melting, or cracking materials. For industrial activities with very high heat requirements
that go beyond 1,000 degrees Celsius, current electrification technologies are limited,
but this level of heat is needed only for certain processes like the production of virgin
steel, cement, and ceramics. For other process with lower temperature requirements and
moderate heating, ventilation, and air conditioning needs, using electric boilers, electric
furnaces, heat pumps, and electric evaporation equipment are feasible. Helping industrial
facility owners identify and invest in available equipment alternatives are key to achieving
this strategy.
Electrify 30% of total existing residential
buildings by 2035
Residential building electrification is one of the most important climate actions Chicagoans
can take that also provides immediate health benefits for households. To achieve this goal,
the City and its private, nonprofit, and public-sector partners will support homeowners
and landlords in installing new electric heat pumps for heating, cooling, and hot water.
Electric resistance heat can complement heat pumps in cold weather, but most new heat
pumps operate efficiently at extreme temperatures. Other residential electrification
actions will include replacing existing stoves, dryers, and other appliances with electric
technology. Weatherization and other efficiency measures should be in place in parallel
to electrification to make energy bills affordable.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
BACP, DOB,
DPD
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
CDOT, CHA,
DOB, DOH,
DPD
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 105 106
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 2
ACTIONS
(cont.)
D Electrify 10% of total existing commercial
buildings by 2035
The ease of electrifying commercial buildings depends on many factors, including building
size. Smaller commercial buildings can often follow a similar electrification strategy as
residential buildings, where swapping appliance-sized equipment is straightforward.
Medium- and large-sized commercial buildings with central heating systems face more
complexity, including a potential need to upgrade electrical service to handle the added
load, improve structural support for heavier equipment, and/or improve refrigerant
management practices.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
DOB, DPD
F
E
Enable 2,500 new public passenger electric
vehicle charging stations by 2035
Electric vehicles provide a clean mobility option for those in communities where a car is
a necessity, provide significant cost savings to drivers due to lower operation costs and
fuel savings, reduce street-level air pollution, and lead to reduced GHG emissions if the
charge source is powered with clean energy. While continuing to invest in strategies that
enable residents to reduce the number of vehicle miles traveled, the City will also support
equitable adoption of electric vehicles by expanding and improving Chicago’s charging
infrastructure. In 2020, every community area has a registered electric vehicle. However,
70% of public electric vehicle charging infrastructure is concentrated in 3 community areas,
and 47 community areas don’t have a single public electric vehicle charger. In coordination
with private and public electric vehicle charger operators and building owners, the City will
enable the installation of 2,500 new commercial-grade, Level 2 public passenger electric
vehicle charging stations by 2035, with priority given to low- and middle-income communities. Because electric vehicle uptake will not enable the City to provide safe, affordable
and efficient transportation for all, the City will continue to prioritize investments in transit,
walking, biking, and shared mobility.
Electrify 90% of total existing City-owned
buildings by 2035
Because electrifying buildings requires new equipment and workforce techniques, the
City can spur local capacity by transitioning most of its own buildings. City leadership in
implementing building electrification will enable installers to invest in workforce training
and technology partnerships, making it easier for private building owners to also transition
to electric equipment.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
CDOT, CTA,
DPD
GHG Impacts
◆◆◇
City Partners
AIS, CDA,
DOB, DPD,
DWM, PBC
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 107 108
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 3
ALIGN BUILDING CODES AND
STANDARDS WITH CLIMATE BEST
PRACTICES
To support Chicago’s transition to a low-carbon future,
the City must modernize its planning, zoning, and
building codes. Retrofits can be expanded and accelerated by codes related to electrifying buildings, and
upon major renovations requiring greater energy
efficiency, integrating renewable energy and electric vehicle charging, and improving resiliency. Codes
and standards also present an opportunity to ensure
new building construction is climate-change ready,
which prevents the waste associated with retrofitting
recently constructed buildings. City planning policies
and regulations must be aligned with goals and priorities outlined in the 2022 CAP.
“
Reforestation of the City.
Vacant lots that are owned by the
City of Chicago should be turned
over to the community to convert
to greenspaces and gardens or
replanted (trees, etc.) by the City.
- Resident of South Shore
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about building codes and standards should consider these initial questions
to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ In residential buildings, are savings benefiting renters?
□ Are building efficiency retrofits being combined with electrification to
ensure long-term affordability?
□ Are investments in workforce development and low-carbon construction practices being made to ensure affordable access to code compliance?
□ Are investments in contractor training being made to support their
transition towards new building practices?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Are facilities with fuels that contribute the most to adverse health
impacts being prioritized, such as those that have fuel combustion
within living spaces or frequently use diesel generators?
□ Are designated environmental justice areas or communities with high
pollution burden being prioritized by incentive and financing programs?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Is access to affordable housing being maintained or expanded?
Community health and
resiliency □ Do building electrification and efficiency strategies improve thermal
comfort, indoor air quality, and resiliency to extreme weather?
□ Do code adjustments take into account likely shifts in future weather
patterns over the life of the building?
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 109 110
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 3
KNOWN HURDLES • Lack of policy enforcement resources
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Update the City’s Sustainable Development policy • Evaluate alignment with federal policies including
the 30x30 Executive Order
• Develop a Building Performance Standard policy,
and a general decarbonization policy
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Vegetated acreage increased • Surface area of roofs and walls retrofit with vege
-
tation
• Total and percentage of electrified projects • Number and percentage of net-zero-carbon build
-
ings built each year
• Building energy intensity
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 111 112
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 3
ACTIONS
A Strengthen policies that support installation of
green roofs and walls, tree planting, and other
vegetative cover by 2023
By 2023, the City will enable green-roof and green-wall installations, tree planting, and
other vegetative cover on both existing buildings and new construction. Expanding and
protecting Chicago’s green spaces reduces urban heat, improves air quality, and decreases
GHG emissions. Establishing a clear and sustainable strategy aimed at greening our environment will benefit all Chicagoans.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
AIS, CDOT,
Chicago Park
District, CFD,
DOB, DPD,
DSS
B Enable net-zero-carbon construction by 2040
In alignment with Building Decarbonization Working Group report by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, the City will enable net-zero-carbon construction by 2040.
Net-zero construction standards can dramatically reduce built environment GHG emissions.
In addition to targeting energy-related emissions once buildings are in use, net-zero-carbon
construction incentives will also target embodied carbon—the emissions associated
with the production, transportation, and disposal of building materials and the building
construction process. Cement production, for example, is a carbon-intensive building
material. By substituting traditional materials for low-carbon alternatives, a project can
reduce its embodied carbon.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
DOB, DPD,
CFD
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 113 114
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 4
DECOMMISSION FOSSIL
POWER
Making our electric grid cleaner requires more than
improving access to renewable energy generation or
incentivizing demand response. The City must also look
to where our energy is being produced and how it is
being produced. Illinois continues to rely on fossil-fueled power plants for backup power generation when
energy demand is extremely high. Besides these peaker
plants (power plants used only when there is a high
demand for electricity), no fossil-fueled plants are
within city limits. Nonetheless, these “dirty” plants emit
large amounts of unchecked GHGs when activated and
disproportionately affect communities near the site.
KNOWN HURDLES
• Clean renewable back-up power
or storage must be available in
parallel with decommissioning
FIRST NEXT STEPS
• Create a decommissioning transition strategy and implementation plan that also addresses
community needs
PERFORMANCE
METRICS
• Number and capacity of decommissioned fossil plans
“
Decarbonization of industrial
facilities located in and around
vulnerable Chicago communities and cleaning up heavy-duty
vehicle emissions/criteria air
pollutants from shipping.
- Resident of Lincoln Park
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about decommissioning fossil power plants should consider these initial
questions to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Are career transition and development resources being provided to
ensure just transition for workers at these plants?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Are the dirtiest plants being prioritized for closure first?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Do reliability and energy access indicators demonstrate that modernized clean electricity generation and storage infrastructure have been
scaled enough to enable fossil plant shutdowns?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Do communities have shared leadership in decommissioning plans and
prioritization?
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 115 116
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 4
ACTIONS A Develop a fossil-fuel plants transition strategy
by 2024
By 2024, the City will develop a peaker plant (power plant used only when there is a high
demand for electricity) transition strategy with guidance for an equitable, safe, and inclusive
process. Transitioning to the use of alternatives such as battery storage and renewable
energy will reduce emissions and alleviate the burden of legacy pollution exposure. In
addition, the City will work with local, state, and regional partners during implementation
of the Climate and Equitable Jobs Act (CEJA) to ensure the benefits of a just energy tran
-
sition support Chicago residents and businesses as well. By reducing Chicago’s reliance
on fossil fuels and helping Illinois retire its polluting energy infrastructure, the City can
not only improve overall grid resiliency, but also improve air quality, reduce pollution, and
dramatically decrease GHGs. A just energy transition to renewable sources and energy
storage will also provide new economic opportunities for Chicagoans while safeguarding
reliable and safe service.
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
AIS
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 117 118
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 5
ENABLE INTERCONNECTION
AND STORAGE
To ensure that cleaning our electric grid enhances
power reliability and resiliency, Chicago will increase
energy storage and distribution, and will promote better
demand response during periods of peak electricity
usage. Community energy resiliency, via renewable
energy generation combined with energy storage,
can help communities withstand power-loss events.
Power losses caused by severe weather or surges
in energy consumption can pose serious threats to
Chicagoans, particularly those who are low-income,
medically dependent, elderly, or who have disabilities.
For many, losing food, heat, or medical equipment
due to power outages can be life-threatening. Fossilfuel burning backup generators can help during these
events, but they are often expensive, energy inefficient, and polluting. Clean, local microgrids make those
systems unnecessary.
KNOWN HURDLES
• Vendor capabilities, available
vendors, and vendor contracting
support
• Equitable ownership and placement of energy storage
FIRST NEXT STEPS
• Integrate equitable interconnection and storage strategies
into the City’s electricity franchise agreement
• Engage with utility provider to
align on shared energy demand
reduction plans and efficiency
goals
PERFORMANCE
METRICS
• Energy storage capacity
• Demand response capacity
“
Make it easy to bring new solar
onto the grid so permitting and
grid interconnection fees don’t
limit clean energy installations
within the city.
 - Resident of Hyde Park
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about enabling interconnection and storage should consider these initial
questions to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Do new infrastructure development activities provide equitable job
training, employment, and contracting opportunities in priority
communities?
□ Are diverse workforce development, procurement, and contracting
strategies used?
□ Are Chicagoans benefiting from reduced energy bills and improved
reliability?
Reduced pollution
burden □ Are demand response aspects being optimized to reduce the dirtiest
fossil peak use in the most vulnerable environmental justice communities?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Are consumer protections and access to demand response benefits,
programs, and technology in place?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Do communities have shared leadership in project siting, prioritizing
resiliency, renewable generation and local emission reductions?
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 119 120
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 5
ACTIONS
A Ensure 150 megawatts of energy storage by 2025
Investing in energy storage capacity is necessary to enable a full transition to renewable
energy. Wind and solar production vary daily and seasonally, making storage critical to reliable
supply from renewables 24 hours a day. Building storage capacity adds grid flexibility and
reliability and has air quality benefits. During peak demand (like hot summer days requiring
heavy air conditioner use), electricity generators need to turn on their backup peaker plants
(power plants used only when there is a high demand for electricity), which often create
more pollution than the main generation plants. Batteries can fill the gap created by these
energy surges without activating the dirtiest supply options. By working with partners to
build energy storage, the City can prioritize enhancing reliability in communities particularly susceptible to climate-related power-loss events. Since these power-loss events
pose a serious threat to Chicagoans, combining renewable energy generation with energy
storage can help reduce community vulnerability by keeping life-saving equipment turned
on and running. This combination will also lower energy bills for Chicago utility customers.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
AIS, CCC, CFD,
CHA, CPS,
DOB, DPD
B Invest in 1,000 megawatts of demand response
by 2024, and 3,000 megawatts by 2035
Energy demand surges occur when many energy customers use significant amounts of
energy at the same time (for example: using air conditioning during heat waves). These surges
can exacerbate air pollution and cause power losses for many Chicagoans. To avoid this,
energy demand reduction programs enable users to consume less power overall, including
during peak hours. By achieving 1,000 megawatts of new energy demand reduction capacity
by 2030, and increasing to 3,000 megawatts by 2040, Chicagoans will be better protected
during extreme weather events, when electrical grids are unable to supply enough power to
meet surge in demand. Effective energy demand reduction programs can not only reduce
energy consumption and make our grid more reliable but can also reduce emissions by
decreasing reliance on Chicago’s peaker plants (power plants used only when there is a
high demand for electricity).
GHG Impacts
◆◆◆
City Partners
AIS, CCC,
CHA, CPS
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 121 122
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
5PILLAR
STRENGTHEN
COMMUNITIES AND
PROTECT HEALTH
Delivering climate equity for all Chicagoans requires decision-making that is
informed by relevant, accurate, and consistently measured metrics. Quality-oflife metrics can track progress and hold the City and partners accountable for
delivering equitable outcomes and can illustrate how well the City is measuring
up to closing the racial life-expectancy gap. The City will continue working with
communities on the frontline of the climate crisis to define metrics that enable
and encourage equity-forward decisions by City departments and policymakers.
Relevant
Quality-of-life metrics will be used to evaluate
progress and gaps toward achieving climate
equity for all Chicagoans. To inform impactful
decisions, metrics must show where further
action is needed to reverse harmful impacts on
overburdened, underserved, vulnerable, front
-
line, and other communities. These metrics
will include but are not limited to the following
indicators: economic inclusion and savings,
reduced pollution burden, community health
and resiliency, equitable access to critical infra
-
structure, and community resiliency. Metrics
should be understandable and accessible to
all Chicagoans.
Accurate
The City will work to develop quality-of-life
metrics that are built using both lived experi
-
ences and scientific evidence. To ensure trans
-
parency, the City will disclose the data sources
and how the data is used to create its metrics.
Consistent
The City will work to develop quality-of-life
metrics that are complete and regularly
reported. Incomplete data will be avoided
to ensure that the needs of residents in all
communities are correctly reflected in reported
metrics and the decisions they inform. However,
incomplete data will not be an excuse to ignore
communities underserved by current data
collection and reporting. The City will endeavor
to ensure data collection and reporting are
comprehensive and equitable.
Nature Based Solutions
1. Access to nature-based community
assets can be integrated into commu
-
nity health and resilience metrics.
2. Plant enough trees or vegetation to
match or exceed the environmental
and public health benefits lost by the
removal of trees during demolition,
construction, or other development.
3. Optimize use of permeable materials,
reflective surfaces, and tree and vege
-
tative cover in communities experi
-
encing greatest impacts from urban
flooding or heat index.
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 123 124
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 1
COLLECT RELEVANT
DATA
The percentage of household income spent on energy
costs (energy burden) and pollution exposure are unique
to each household. Proximity to pollution sources
like roadways or industrial facilities determines the
quality of air and soil that each household experiences.
Electricity and gas rates that customers pay determine
the percentage of household income spent on energy
services (amount of energy burden). City-level data
cannot help identify where pollution exposure is high,
or where or when residents must choose between
buying food and heating or cooling their homes.
Energy burden, water quality, soil quality, and air quality
data can be used to measure the equity of climate
action across Chicago neighborhoods. Data will be
collected by community area, where possible, to show
decision-makers where and how their decisions most
affect residents. By tracking these data points in each
neighborhood, residents can hold City leadership
accountable to make equitable decisions that address
energy burden and pollution exposure.
“
Environmental justice needs to
be at the forefront of every aspect
of the CAP.
- Resident of Buena Park
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about climate and pollution-related data collection should consider these initial
questions to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Are diverse workforce development, procurement, and contracting
strategies used?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Are there plans for equitable corrective action when monitoring shows
problems with poor water, soil, or air quality?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure □ Are monitors and testing for air, water, and soil testing equitably
deployed and maintained?
□ Are designated environmental justice areas or communities with high
pollution burden being prioritized by data collection approaches?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Are communities empowered to use monitoring data to advance their
priorities for health and resiliency investments?
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 125 126
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 1
KNOWN HURDLES • Current energy burden data cannot be used at
zip-code levels
• Funding and operational support are needed to
install and maintain water and air quality monitors,
conduct soil tests, and address poor results
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Evaluate reporting requirements and data avail
-
ability in collaboration with utilities and other public
agencies such as the Illinois Commerce Commission
• Establish reporting and governance requirements • Define minimum water, air, and soil quality levels
and consistently address problems when these
minimum levels are not met
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Percentage decrease in energy burden over time • Percentage of students with access to healthy soil,
reported citywide and per neighborhood
• Coverage percentage of air quality monitoring at
CTA stations, and targeted bus stops
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 127 128
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 1
ACTIONS
A Report energy burden by community area by
2023
Energy burden is experienced when households spend so much income on electricity or
gas bills that it is difficult to buy food, access transportation, and grow wealth. The City
will analyze energy reports and other data sources to identify where building retrofits or
energy subsidies are most needed. Tracking this data over time will also measure progress
toward achieving the City’s equity goals.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDPH, OERJ
C
B
Establish a robust outdoor air quality
monitoring network by 2025
Exposure to pollutants such as ozone and PM2.5 (particulate matter that is 2.5 microns
in size) is associated with increased risk of respiratory infections, lung irritation, asthma,
cardiovascular disease, cancer, and early death. Fossil-fuel combustion has a negative
impact on climate change and air quality, both indoors and outdoors. By reducing fuel
combustion and increasing nature-based solutions (for example, planting trees in neighborhoods), climate action can improve air quality. Measuring and reporting air quality at
various sites such as CTA bus and “L” stations, schools, or city facilities will demonstrate
the impact of the City’s climate investments and the modernization of planning policies. In
addition, a monitoring network will help identify where more action is needed to ensure
all residents have access to healthy air.
Develop a water and soil quality measurement
and mitigation strategy by 2023
A commitment to advancing environmental justice recognizes the difference in exposure
to contaminants based on proximity to sources of pollution. Water quality can change as
water infrastructure ages or as water sources become polluted. Poor water quality can
expose people to dangerous contaminants and chemicals, which can adversely affect the
health of individuals. Similarly, soil contamination can also expose residents to dangerous
chemicals and reduce property values.
In partnership with City-operated facilities, sister agencies, and community-based organizations, proactive measurement, public reporting, and application of water and soil
quality data can inform where infrastructure improvements are needed and help prioritize
investments to ensure healthy, safe, and vibrant communities.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
AIS, CDOT,
CDPH, CPS,
CTA
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
AIS, Chicago
Park District,
DWM
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 129 130
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 2
ENABLE DATA-DRIVEN
DECISION-MAKING
Achieving equity across neighborhoods will require that
City policymakers and implementers have relevant and
accurate data when making decisions. By integrating
decision-making with equity criteria, City decisions
can be made to objectively prioritize health outcomes.
In collaboration with community groups and frontline
leaders, the City will define health and equity indicators building on the past framework of the Health in
All Policies City resolution and the Healthy Chicago
2025 plan advancing racial equity to close Chicago’s
life expectancy gap. It will also create a consistent
measure of which communities lack equitable access
to a quality life.
“
Transparency and accountability measures.
- Resident of Edgewater
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about including equity criteria into planning should consider these initial questions
to improve the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Are community members compensated for their insights and contributions to planning processes?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Are overburdened communities’ needs and aspirations prioritized?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Is relevant data broadly available and made understandable to a broad
audience?
□ Do health and equity criteria enable decisions to be made while considering impacts across communities, gender, race, ethnic groups, and
socioeconomic groups?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Are community groups and frontline leaders included when establishing
decision-making criteria and quality-of-life metrics into plans?
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 131 132
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 2
KNOWN HURDLES • Government leadership and operational support
are needed to ensure that health and equity criteria
are consistently considered when making decisions
• Balancing the needs of data privacy and data trans
-
parency
• Limited ability for community to influence deci
-
sion-making related to infrastructure
• Existing reliable, granular data may not exist for all
desired metrics
• Resourcing is needed for data collection and
reporting
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Establish health and equity criteria and process for
integrating them with decision-making processes
• Convene community working groups to establish
quality-of-life and just transition metrics and to
review and update community resiliency metrics
• Encourage owners and operators of key infrastruc
-
ture systems to perform climate risk analysis to
determine how climate will affect their systems
• Develop equity risk criteria for evaluating the perfor
-
mance of adaptation plans and actions
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Qualitative and quantitative descriptions of antic
-
ipated equity outcomes of each decision
• Realized equity outcomes of decisions • Year-over-year progress across established metrics
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 133 134
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 2
ACTIONS
A Publish clean energy just transition metrics by
2022
The transition from fossil fuels to a clean-energy economy will certainly bring significant
health and environmental benefits. The City must meet this moment of transition with
tools and processes that support greater pathways to participation, access to workforce
development and employment opportunities, and safe, healthy communities. A collaboration between diverse, local stakeholders affected by the clean-energy transition will
support the optimal alignment and application of the parameters set forth in the Climate
and Equitable Jobs Act (CEJA).
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDOT, CDPH,
DPD
C
B
Develop a Heat Vulnerability Index and integrate
into planning and development, community
safety, and public health planning processes
beginning in 2023
In 1995, Chicago experienced the loss of more than 700 residents during an extreme heat
wave. Residents who were socially isolated, didn’t have indoor cooling appliances, or were
unable to open their windows for cooling were more likely to experience dangerous heat
levels within the home. To this day, this historic event serves as a reference point for the
Office of Emergency Management and Communications (OEMC) and partners who develop
and execute strategies to keep residents and businesses safe during times of crisis. Climate
science indicates that Chicagoland will continue to experience more days of extreme heat
and increased precipitation. Therefore, it is important to proactively consider how these
climate shifts will affect vulnerable communities and to explore diverse pathways for
mitigation and adaptation.
Integrate community resilience and climate
justice criteria into department-level strategic
planning and annual budget setting by 2023
In alignment with the City’s mission to advance structural change to deliver equitable
transformation with our communities, departments will begin to intentionally consider
how standard practices can be used to support or impair community resilience and climate
justice. The City will work with stakeholders to identify key health, resilience, climate, and
equity criteria to assess. Leaning upon lessons from the We Will Chicago strategic planning process and OERJ’s work to support departmental equity strategic plans, the City will
develop a standard practice that can be used to support departments’ assessments and
refine their strategies.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDPH, DFSS,
DPD, MOPD,
OEMC
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDPH, DPD,
OERJ
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 135 136
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 2
ACTIONS
(cont.)
ED
Assess and optimize community-level
emergency management strategies related to
climate preparedness by 2024
The Office of Emergency Management and Communications (OEMC) is Chicago’s lead
coordinating agency during emergency situations, including weather-related incidents. The
OEMC proactively plans for hazards and oversees citywide operations for public safety such
as the initiation of the City’s Emergency Operation Plan, activation of warming and cooling
sites, and communicating through public messages systems such as Notify Chicago. While
a climate hazard may affect the greater city or region, its impact may be unequally felt due
to communities’ underlying physical, socioeconomic, and health conditions. As Chicago
invests in climate resiliency and adaptation, it is critical that OEMC and relevant partners
intentionally consider how to prepare and service communities that will feel the pressures
of a climate hazard first and longest, and that have the greatest needs for a full recovery.
Publish citywide and community-level qualityof-life metrics on equity and sustainability by
2023
Quality of life is commonly measured at the country or city level. When income and access
to services and amenities are evaluated citywide, Chicago consistently ranks as an afford
-
able city with excellent job opportunities and many recreation options. In reality, many
Chicagoans struggle to afford life in the city. They cannot access the jobs and recreation
options that the city offers. Quality of life must be measured at the zip-code level to identify
where investment, services, and support are needed to ensure all Chicagoans can live well
and thrive. The City will work with community groups and frontline leaders to identify
metrics that meaningfully reflect community needs, aspirations, and well-being. These
metrics will be measured and publicly reported every year.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDPH, DFSS,
DPD, MOPD,
OEMC
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDPH, OERJ
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 137 138
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 3
ENABLE COMMUNITY
RESILIENCY
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, neighbors,
community groups, civic organizations, and local businesses banded together to assess and meet the needs
of fellow community members during an unbelievably
tumultuous time. Again, community cohesion and ready
access to resources served as a lifeline for thousands
during a crisis. As the City strives to reduce emission
levels, there must also be an effort to enable greater
community resilience to withstand the impacts that
are underway. By co-designing resiliency projects
with community members, local civic leaders, and
businesses, initiatives can stem from a shared understanding of historic events, community needs, and
other critical insights unique to that community. By
prioritizing community collaboration and equitable
capacity-building, the City enables more efficient and
effective community response during the times when
every minute counts.
“
Work with existing environmental justice organizations in
Chicago to fund and implement
plans already created.
- Resident of Rogers Park
Equity, Resiliency, and Environmental Justice
Considerations
Those making decisions about including resiliency planning should consider these initial questions to improve
the equity, resiliency, and environmental justice outcomes of their efforts:
Co-Benefits Considerations Checklist
Economic inclusion
and savings
□ Are diverse workforce development, procurement, and contracting
strategies used?
Reduced pollution
burden
□ Does the approach consider the complexity of cumulative impact?
Equitable access to
critical infrastructure
□ Is the approach and funding flexible enough to respond to shifting
needs around critical infrastructure?
Community health and
resiliency
□ Are community groups and frontline leaders included in co-developing
programs and investments?
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 139 140
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR
1
2
3
4
5
 STRATEGY 3
KNOWN HURDLES • Vendor capabilities, available vendors, and vendor
contracting support
FIRST NEXT STEPS • Enhance urban forestry management and admin
-
istration of Chicago landscaping processes by
increasing the planting and maintenance of native
trees and plants
• Develop an equity-centric complement to Citysponsored emergency-response volunteer workforce programs • Support the development of an equity evaluation
framework, actions and metrics that supports
community climate adaptation and resiliency strate
-
gies, including the expansion nature-based solutions
• Co-define and assess the impact of developing
community-level climate resilience networks or
hubs with community-based organizations
PERFORMANCE METRICS • Annual reporting of community-led infrastructure
projects, per community area
• Confirmation of resiliency strategy inclusion in the
City’s hazard mitigation planning
Faith in Place: Windsor Park
Lutheran Church
The Windsor Park Lutheran Church of South Shore
implements sustainability programs that benefit the
surrounding community and its congregation. The
church maintains a community garden that supports
the church-hosted food pantry and serves 150-200
families each week. The garden also serves as an educa
-
tional tool for over 500 congregation members, youth,
and community residents interested in learning about
sustainable food production and the value of nature in
the urban space. Windsor Park Lutheran is currently
striving to improve South Shore’s “connectivity gap”,
where nearly 27% of residents do not have reliable
access to the internet. Working with Faith In Place,
Elevate NFP, and Chicago Permaculture Convergence
in 2015, Windsor Park Lutheran Church installed a
Wi-Fi repeater on the roof of the Church allowing it to
offer free Wi-Fi to anyone within a half block radius. In
2021, the church organized and implemented an ambi
-
tious tree planting program, distributed reusable bags,
worked with facility managers to reduce energy use
and to employ sustainable landscaping practices, and
engaged directly with the residents on the importance
of green spaces, renewable energy, and air quality.
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 141 142
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
PILLAR 1 2 3 4 5
 STRATEGY 3
ACTIONS
A Resource community-led climate infrastructure
projects by 2022
Pairing citywide infrastructure investments with community-designed resiliency projects
creates more effective and relevant projects to those living within a community. By engaging
residents and local leadership in project design, development, and implementation, the
City can foster deeper relationships with those experiencing the climate hazards most
directly and better serve those communities.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
DPD
B Integrate community resiliency strategies with
the City’s hazard mitigation planning by 2023
As part of the City’s regular hazard mitigation planning process, senior residents, people
with disabilities, and residents living in high-risk geographic areas are recognized as most
vulnerable to the negative impacts of hazards and natural disasters. As a part of the next
planning cycle, the Office of Emergency Management and Communications (OEMC) will
continue to explicitly develop resiliency goals and metrics to reduce the social, economic,
and environmental impacts of disasters with a particular analysis of how to foster greater
community resiliency during times of crisis.
GHG Impacts
◆◇◇
City Partners
CDPH, DFSS,
DPD, MOPD,
OEMC
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 143 144
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
The goals of the 2022 CAP are ambitious and illustrate the need for collective, coor
-
dinated, and equitable action for optimal impact. As we work together to slow the
pace of climate change through mitigation strategies, it is important to take action to
minimize the impact of the changes we can no longer avoid. A wide variety of strate
-
gies can be used to stabilize current emissions levels and adapt to known shifts in our
region’s climate patterns. Community-level empowerment and investment must be a
part of any strategy to ensure that community leaders have accurate information and
an awareness of which resources and systems are available for their community’s use.
Responses to the climate crisis will become more difficult and expensive to implement
the longer equitable adaptation and resiliency efforts are deferred.
Effective and responsive climate action planning
can be complex and requires highly coordinated
efforts from the local government, individual
households, communities, businesses, and other
stakeholders. This section is focused on two related
pathways toward climate stability: adaptation and
resiliency. To illustrate this, we can think about
extreme heat events caused by climate change.
Adaptation accepts the new reality—an increase
in extreme heat days —and modifies systems and
practices given the new reality. Resiliency, on the
other hand, is the ability to recover quickly from
future extreme heat events due to sufficient antic
-
ipation and preparation.
Community residents on the frontlines of climate
change across Chicago have learned to anticipate a
flooded basement or impassable street after a heavy
summer storm. During the winter, commuters
adjust their schedules to allow extra travel time
or may miss work if transit systems are unable to
operate. However, current and anticipated changes
to our region’s climate will make these seemingly
simple, expected shifts more serious and less
predictable. With extreme rainfall, more intense
and unpredictable flooding may cause damage
and loss to personal and public property; create
hazardous health conditions due to exposure of
contaminated sewer water; or destroy crops and
disrupt access to fresh produce and the livelihoods
of affected farmers.
ADAPTATION AND
RESILIENCY
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 145 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 146 146
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Extreme heat is expected to bring more days of extreme
temperatures and longer seasons of heat. More days
of these heat conditions may worsen air quality and
put residents with existing health conditions such
as asthma or heart disease at greater risk; require
extended use of cooling appliances and increase utility
costs over the season; or require more frequent acti
-
vation of cooling centers and support services like
transportation services and well-being checks.
Worsening winter weather conditions of heavy snow,
ice accumulation, and intense winds present safety
risks associated with hazardous driving conditions;
endanger the health and safety of those experiencing
homelessness, housing insecurity, or who cannot afford
to pay their utility bills; and burden City services and
resources such as plows and salt trucks, 911, and other
emergency responders.
These familiar weather patterns are gradually increasing
in frequency and intensity. When unaddressed, slowmoving disasters can place tremendous pressure
on families and communities, especially those who
experience multiple impacts over a short time or are
already vulnerable based on medical or economic status,
quality of housing, and age. Mitigation efforts alone
are not sufficient to protect communities burdened
by the cumulative impact of various social, economic,
health, and environmental inequities. Community-level
education and engagement is needed to ensure those
communities most affected by the impacts of climate
change have the necessary tools and preparation to
act quickly and decisively to save lives in a time of need.
Historically, planning and investments for adaptation
and resiliency have benefited high-income and/or
politically active communities. Due to unjust practices
in planning and political engagement, there are greater
barriers to participation and decision-making for older
adults, low-income, people of color, as well as those
with medical or mobility challenges. As a result, these
communities lack the necessary access and resources
to efficiently respond to the climate hazards they are
more likely to face. The simultaneous challenges of
facing climate risks at a disproportionate rate while
not being involved in the processes to design possible
solutions underscore the imbalanced way that climate
change is affecting communities. To prevent further
harm and to restore and prepare Chicago communi
-
ties to be climate-ready, all adaptation and resiliency
actions must be anchored in the values of equity, racial
justice, and community leadership.
Given the outsized role in affecting climate that dense
urban cities play, Chicago stands as a ready partner in
several regional hazard mitigation and adaptation plan
-
ning spaces. As member of the 2019 Steering Committee
for the update of the Cook County Multi-Jurisdictional
Hazard Mitigation Plan, the City—along with more than
115 municipalities across Cook County, federal agen
-
cies, and other partners—worked to identify risks and
make appropriate response plans for natural hazards
like flooding, extreme winter weather, and tornadoes
in the county. Chicago is a founding member of the
Metropolitan Mayors Caucus, which brings 275 cities
across Chicagoland together to work on public policy
issues.
Adaptation
Climate adaptation involves adjustments to major
systems to better respond to expected events and their
effects. Deciding which systems to adjust, what changes
should be made, and which to prioritize requires an
accurate understanding of local assets and risks, and
collaboration between diverse stakeholders, including
community-based organizations, government entities,
local businesses and corporate partners, industrial
associations, and philanthropic organizations.
In its 2021 Chicagoland Region Climate Action Plan,
the Metropolitan Mayors Caucus elevated five climate
adaptation objectives for cities to consider while devel
-
oping their climate action strategies and policies. The
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 147 148
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
2022 CAP embraces an evidence-based approach to
these objectives for the development of appropriate
adaptation and resiliency plans.
1. Engage and educate the community about
climate resiliency and adaptation.
2. Incorporate equity and inclusion into climate
adaptation efforts.
3. Collaborate and build capacity for a more resil
-
ient community.
4. Enact plans and policies focused on adaptation
and resiliency.
5. Adapt operations and investments for future
climate conditions.
No matter the scope (community-level or citywide),
transformational climate adaptation will reflect local
priorities and practice meaningful community engage
-
ment throughout the design, implementation, and
evaluation of actions.
Resiliency
Resiliency describes the capability of a system to with
-
stand and recover from an adverse event. Resiliency
is important because it addresses the direct needs of
local communities. Given Chicago’s vibrant diversity,
there cannot be one solution for all neighborhoods.
Heat waves, flooding, and other climate and weather
events each affect the broader Chicago community
differently. The need to address these problems varies
widely and requires that existing and future climate
risks be well understood, monitored, and considered
in planning and policy development. Governments and
institutions are generally well-equipped to understand
the risks or impacts that affect them. Resilient planning,
however, must go further to engage a network of rele
-
vant local stakeholders who can contextualize efforts
in terms of the community’s unique needs and assets.
Climate resiliency is often associated with severe events
(like heat waves, droughts, hurricanes, or wildfires).
However, the best resiliency planning also accounts for
common, less extreme events (like flooding, worsening
water and air quality, and migration caused by the
impacts of climate change). The best climate resiliency
plans for Chicago residents are those designed to
build the capacity of systems, agencies, communities,
businesses, and residents to withstand and perhaps
avoid climate disasters occurring in slow motion across
the city that may not rise to the level of an emergency
declaration according to county or federal standards.
Effective resiliency planning involves: • Maintaining access to life essential services: energy,
food, water, shelter, and healthcare.
• Ensuring reliable access and operating capacity for
critical infrastructure such as renewable energy,
battery storage, and telecommunication assets.
• Engaging residents in the process of assessing
community assets, risks, and needs.
• Investing in the redevelopment of existing or
construction of new facilities that flexibly meet
community-identified needs for resiliency.
• Providing accessible, culturally relevant, and
understandable educational materials about Citysponsored services and programs.
• Supporting and empowering local communities
and vulnerable populations to assist themselves in
various types of crises, especially, the elderly, young
children, the sick, and low-income populations.
• Integrating policies with climate change risks and
hazards in mind.
• Developing policies and social infrastructure to
provide or improve emergency preparedness and
communication among agencies, first-responders,
and local community organizations.
• Offering diverse transportation and access options
to support residents of varying physical ability.
Extreme weather events have shown that resiliency
is an essential component of any climate action plan.
Resiliency efforts address the asset, neighborhood, and
individual levels of how to deal with climate impacts.
Resiliency supports sustainable development and the
construction of better, more durable physical, social,
and local neighborhood systems (like resiliency hubs).
It will take a combined and coordinated effort that
centers equity to effectively and affordably address the
issue of climate change. Building a resilient commu
-
nity not only helps to protect Chicagoans, but also
generates beneficial economic activity. Investments
in resiliency stimulate investments in jobs and infra
-
structure that can uplift entire communities, or help
communities uplift themselves. Effective municipal
planning must intentionally protect and strengthen
community resiliency to ensure residents and busi
-
nesses can adapt, plan for, and thrive in the face of a
changing climate. The message is clear: Investment in
infrastructure, communication, and community-driven
processes brings greater resiliency and secures a more
sustainable, stable, and prosperous future.
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 149 150
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
Guided by the strategies and actions of this plan, the City of Chicago aims
to reduce the city’s level of GHG emissions by 62% by 2040, based on 2017
GHG inventory levels. While the urgency of the global climate crisis demands
ambitious GHG reduction, the City also recognizes the monumental opportu
-
nity to invest in Chicago’s residents, our communities, and our shared future.
Intentional and coordinated implementation between city departments, sister
agencies, community-based organizations, residents, and advocates can drive
transformational changes.
The 2022 CAP is a dynamic document that
must evolve alongside our communities,
technology, and economies for sustained
progress. Through the 8-month series of
stakeholder engagement process, partici
-
pants raised the following aspirations for a
foundational accountability framework for
the 2022 CAP: • Focused support for critically impacted
or vulnerable communities
• Data transparency to support community
empowerment and meaningful partici
-
pation
• Accurate project evaluation through
community-level feedback pathways
• Long-standing accountability structures
to withstand political transitions
• Community partnership and oversight for
any implementation process
ACCOUNTABILITY AND
IMPLEMENTATION
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 151 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 152 152
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
To support continued advancement of the plan’s targets over time, the City will formalize the
plan’s actions through legislation and coordination with the citywide planning process—We
Will Chicago. Furthermore, the City remains committed to broader and iterative community
conversations about the best structures and tools for community-level collaboration while
minimizing engagement fatigue. Our strategy will include:
• Supporting a 3-year review and revision cycle of the 2022 CAP targets
• Formalizing the plan’s actions through legislation and policy co-designed with local stakeholders
• Leveraging and/or optimizing the use of the City’s racial equity impact assessment tools for equitable
implementation of climate actions
• Integrating relevant climate, resilience, sustainability, and environmental metrics into citywide planning
reporting platforms
• Co-developing meaningful key performance indicators, evaluation processes, and reporting strategies in
coordination with diverse stakeholders
• Fostering collaborative partnerships between communities and with City representatives to effectively
monitor and refine CAP initiatives based on community-level assessments
LOOKING AHEAD
A truly resilient city is one that not only adapts and
performs during stable periods but also recovers safely
and effectively after challenges (Resilient Chicago). A
city’s ability to cope with climate change should be
defined by the ability of its residents, communities,
institutions, businesses, and systems to endure, adapt,
and grow despite any sudden or slowly unfolding shocks
and any lingering stresses. The hazards and impacts
associated with climate change require policy changes,
engagement with frontline and other communities, and
strategic and appropriate infrastructure investments
designed to protect our whole community—people,
natural systems, and our built environment.
Proactive and consistent collaboration between
community members, local government, neighboring
community areas, utility partners, and other stakeholders can begin immediately. Led by values of equity
and mutual respect, and accounting for cumulative
burden, local government can facilitate spaces to
deliver the most affordable and effective climate and
safety solutions. Actions must follow an ongoing cycle
of preparation, response, evaluation, and revision. It
is a dynamic, participatory process that should be
revised over time based on measured progress and
technological advancements. Through meaningful
and decision-guiding engagement, communities, local
governments, businesses, and other stakeholders can
build local capacities to adapt to climate impacts while
also innovating in policy and development. Cities that
incorporate adaptation and resiliency within existing
planning processes will be best positioned to thrive
through a new era of climate change. The 2022 CAP
serves as a guide for the city. The actions detailed the
plan, once achieved, will position Chicago and residents
to thrive in the dynamic future that lies ahead.
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 153 154
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
IMPLEMENTATION
TABLE
Action ID 2022 CAP Action Metrics City Partners Timeframe Action Status
1.1.A Retrofit residential buildings with 4 or fewer units: 20% by 2030 and 50%
by 2040, prioritizing lower- and middle-income households Percentage of buildings retrofitted; greenhouse gases avoided CHA, DOB, DOH,
DPD 5+ years In progress
1.1.B Retrofit 20% of total 5+ unit residential buildings by 2030 Percentage of buildings retrofitted; greenhouse gases avoided CHA, DOB, DOH,
DPD 5+ years In progress
1.1.C Retrofit 20% of total industrial buildings by 2030 Percentage of buildings retrofitted; greenhouse gases avoided DOB, DPD, BACP 5+ years In progress
1.1.D Retrofit 90% of total City-owned and Sister Agency-owned buildings by
2035 Percentage of buildings retrofitted; greenhouse gases avoided
AIS, CCC, CDA,
CDOT, CHA, CPD,
CPS, CTA, DOB,
DWM, PBC
5+ years In progress
1.1.E Retrofit 20% of total commercial buildings by 2035 Percentage of buildings retrofitted; greenhouse gases avoided DOB, DPD 5+ years In progress
1.2.A Install 5 megawatts of co-owned community solar projects by 2025 Megawatts installed AIS, CCC, CHA, CPS,
DOB, DPD 3 to 5 years In progress
1.2.B Increase Chicago-based community renewables to 20 megawatts by 2025 Megawatts installed BACP, DFSS, DPD 3 to 5 years In progress
1.2.C Increase community renewables subscriptions to achieve 25% subscribed
by low-income and/or environmental justice low-income residents by 2030
Number of subscriptions from lower- to middle-class house
-
holds; number of subscriptions from environmental justice
neighborhoods
BACP, DFSS, DPD 5+ years In progress
2.1.A Introduce community-wide organic waste collection and decomposition
by 2025 Number of compost sites; pounds of organics collected annually CDPH, CPS, DPD,
DSS 3 to 5 years In progress
2.1.B Implement equitable waste source prevention strategies by 2030 Number of communities served; percentage waste diversion BACP, CDPH, DOB,
DPD, DSS 5+ years Not in progress
2.1.C Divert 90% of commercial, industrial, and institutional waste by 2030 Percentage waste diverted CDPH, DOB, DPD,
DSS 5+ years Not in progress
2.1.D Divert 75% of construction and demolition waste by 2030 Percentage waste diverted CDPH, DOB, DPD,
DSS 5+ years Not in progress
2.1.E Enable building design for disassembly and reuse by 2035 Percentage waste diverted DOB, DPD 5+ years Not in progress
2.1.F Divert 90% of residential waste by 2040 Percentage waste diverted CDPH, DOB, DPD,
DSS 5+ years Not in progress
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 155 156
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
IMPLEMENTATION
TABLE
(cont.)
Action ID 2022 CAP Action Metrics City Partners Timeframe Action Status
3.1.A Expand high-quality and low-stress on-street bikeways and off-street trails Number of miles of new bikeways and trails; GHG avoided CDOT, DPD 5+ years In progress
3.1.B Increase Divvy bikes and shared micromobility trips 30% by 2030 Percentage increase in Divvy bikes and micromobility use;
GHG avoided CDOT, DPD 5+ years In progress
3.1.C Enable Chicagoans to walk, bike, take transit, or use shared micromobility
for 45% of all trips by 2040
Percentage increase in non-car mode share; greenhouse gases
avoided CDOT, CTA, DPD 5+ years In progress
3.2.A Update land use policies to encourage sustainable development, accessibility, and street safety by 2023 Date of passage/adoption CDOT, CTA, DOH, DPD 1 to 3 years In progress
3.2.B Expand use of commuter benefits by 2024 Percentage increase in commuter benefits BACP, CDOT, CTA 1 to 3 years In progress
3.2.C Require transportation demand management plans for new development
by 2025 Date of passage/adoption CDOT, DPD 3 to 5 years Not in progress
3.2.D Update citywide car and bike parking requirements by 2025 Date of passage/adoption CDOT, DPD 3 to 5 years Not in progress
3.2.E Increase CTA ridership by 20% by 2030 Percentage increase in CTA ridership CDOT, CTA, DPD 5+ years In progress
3.3.A Enable electric freight loading docks at commercial and industrial buildings,
addressing new buildings by 2025 and existing buildings by 2030 Number of new electric freight loading docks installed CDOT, DOB, DPD 3 to 5 years Not in progress
3.3.B Support equitable electrification of ride-hail and taxi fleets by 2030 Percentage of fleet electrified; greenhouse gases avoided BACP, CDOT 5+ years In progress
3.3.C Enable 100% electrification of delivery fleets by 2035 Percentage of fleet electrified; greenhouse gases avoided DOB, DPD 5+ years Not in progress
3.3.D Electrify 100% of the City’s fleet by 2035 Percentage of fleet electrified; greenhouse gases avoided AIS, CDOT, CPS 5+ years In progress
3.3.E Achieve zero-emission transit fleets across Chicagoland by 2040 Percentage of fleet electrified; greenhouse gases avoided CTA, DOB, DPD, Metra,
PACE 5+ years In progress
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 157 158
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
IMPLEMENTATION
TABLE
(cont.)
Action ID 2022 CAP Action Metrics City Partners Timeframe Action Status
4.1.A Aggregate 5,000 megawatts of clean renewable energy within a 250-mile
radius of Chicago by 2030 Megawatts installed AIS, DOB, DPD 5+ years In progress
4.1.B Install 30 megawatts of clean renewable energy projects on City property
by 2030 Megawatts installed AIS, CCC, CHA, CPS,
DOB, DPD 5+ years In progress
4.1.C Achieve 100% clean renewable energy community-wide by 2035 Megawatts installed AIS, CCC, CHA, CPS,
DOB, DPD 5+ years In progress
4.2.A Enact policies that support electrified renovations and new construction
by 2023 Percentage electrified; date of passage/adoption BACP, CDOT, DOB,
DPD 1 to 3 years In progress
4.2.B Electrify 30% of total existing residential buildings by 2035 Percentage of buildings electrified; greenhouse gases avoided CDOT, CHA, DOB,
DOH, DPD 5+ years In progress
4.2.C Electrify 20% of total existing industrial buildings by 2035 Percentage of buildings electrified; greenhouse gases avoided BACP, DOB, DPD 5+ years Not in progress
4.2.D Electrify 10% of total existing commercial buildings by 2035 Percentage of buildings electrified; greenhouse gases avoided DOB, DPD 5+ years In progress
4.2.E Electrify 90% of total existing City-owned buildings by 2035 Percentage of buildings electrified; greenhouse gases avoided AIS, CDA, DOB, DPD,
DWM, PBC 5+ years In progress
4.2.F Enable 2,500 new public passenger electric vehicle charging stations by
2035 Number of stations CDOT, CTA, DPD 5+ years In progress
4.3.A Strengthen policies that support installation of green roofs and walls, tree
planting, and other vegetative cover by 2023 Date of passage/adoption AIS, CDOT, CPD,
DOB, DPD, DSS 1 to 3 years In progress
4.3.B Enable net-zero-carbon construction by 2040 Date of passage/adoption; greenhouse gases avoided CFD, DOB, DPD 5+ years In progress
4.4.A Develop a fossil-fuel plants transition strategy by 2024 Date of final plant closure AIS 1 to 3 years In progress
4.5.A Ensure 150 megawatts of energy storage by 2025 Megawatts of energy storage installed AIS, CCC, CFD, CHA,
CPS, DOB, DPD 3 to 5 years Not in progress
4.5.B Encourage 1,000 megawatts of new energy demand reduction by 2030,
and 3,000 megawatts by 2040 Megawatts of demand response increased AIS, CCC, CHA, CPS,
DOB, DPD 5+ years In progress
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 159 160
plan background // GHG reduction targets // climate action strategies // adaptation and resiliency // accountability // implementation table
IMPLEMENTATION
TABLE
(cont.)
Action ID 2022 CAP Action Metrics City Partners Timeframe Action Status
5.1.A Report energy burden by community area by 2023 Date when data is published CDPH, OERJ 1 to 3 years Not in progress
5.1.B Develop a water and soil quality measurement and mitigation strategy
by 2023 Date when strategy is adopted AIS, CPD, DWM 1 to 3 years Not in progress
5.1.C Establish a robust outdoor air quality monitoring network by 2025 Percentage increase in City-coverage; number of new air quality
monitors installed
AIS, CDOT, CDPH,
CPS, CTA 1 to 3 years In progress
5.2.A Publish just energy transition metrics by 2022 Date when report is published CDPH, DPD, OERJ 1 to 3 years Not in progress
5.2.B Integrate community resilience and climate justice criteria into department-level strategic planning and annual budget setting by 2023 Date when policy is adopted CDPH, DFSS, DPD 1 to 3 years In progress
5.2.C
Develop a Heat Vulnerability Index and integrate into planning and development, community safety, and public health planning processes beginning
in 2023
Date when index is published CDPH, DFSS, DPD,
MOPD, OEMC 1 to 3 years Not in progress
5.2.D Publish citywide and community-level quality-of-life metrics on equity
and sustainability by 2023 Date when report is published CDOT, CDPH, DOB,
DPD 1 to 3 years Not in progress
5.2.E Assess and optimize community-level emergency management strategies
related to climate preparedness by 2024 Date when report is published CDPH, DFSS, DPD,
MOPD, OEMC 1 to 3 years Not in progress
5.3.A Resource community-led climate infrastructure projects by 2022 Money allocated DPD 1 to 3 years In progress
5.3.B Integrate community resiliency strategies with the City’s hazard mitigation
planning by 2023 Date when policy is adopted CDPH, DFSS, DPD,
MOPD, OEMC 1 to 3 years Not in progress
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 161 162
APPENDIX
Methodologies: Equity Maps
Summary: The City of Chicago Mayor’s Office Policy Team (City) along with WSP consultants prepared data
visualization maps to illustrate Chicago climate and environmental justice trends. This methodology appendix
discusses the data sources used for these maps.
The Equity Map series is built upon two publicly available data sets :
1. Chicago community area outlines depicts the boundaries of Chicago’s 77 community areas.
This base layer is available by searching “Boundaries: Community Area (Current)” in Chicago’s Data
Portal at https://data.cityofchicago.org/Census tracts
2. Census tracts provides a more granular geographic scope of data to better understand the community data.
This mapping file is available through the U.S. Census Bureau. The TIGER/Line Shapefile reflects the
names and legal boundaries as of January 1, 2020.
Tree Equity
What is the
data?
Chicago Department of Public Health Community Tree Data
The Chicago Department of Publish Health, the University of Chicago Center for
Spatial Data Science, and the University of Chicago Healthy Regions and Policies
Lab, with support from the Partnership for Healthy Cities- a global network
supported by Bloomberg Philanthropies- collected and compiled this data.
Satellite data is used to periodically evaluate the tree coverage across Chicago
and across the greater region.
Was the data
modified? The City collected and visualized the data but did not recalculate or modify it.
Data Visualization
How were
thresholds
determined for
data categories?
The City used 10 quantiles to statistically represent equal observations per category.
How was the
data visualized?
The data was visualized at the census block level to illustrate low to high tree
density.
Extreme Weather Vulnerability
What is the
data?
City Tech, Microsoft, ESRI, d3i, and City of Chicago partnership on urban heat.
The City used NASA data to “analyze heat trends and measure temperature
changes over time,” which allowed the City to illustrate areas of Chicago that are
disproportionately burdened by above-average and extreme heat.
Was the data
modified? The City collected and visualized the data but did not recalculate or modify it.
Data Visualization
How were
thresholds
determined for
data categories?
The City was granted access to the final maps from this partnership and did
not calculate the data thresholds. Instead, the data served as a base layer for an
image overlay of Chicago’s community areas.
How was the
data visualized?
The City created the data visualization to show areas of Chicago that are above
average in terms of the urban heat island effect. The data displayed ranges
between above average and extreme heat.
Affordable Energy Access
What is the
data?
Greenlink Equity Map
The Greenlink Equity Map (GEM) project analyzes public datasets to calculate
and visualize energy and equity data across the country. GEM has been used
by communities to better understand the imbalanced burden of utility costs on
communities at the census tract level.
Was the data
modified?
The City requested and received permission to acquire and visualize the data
from Greenlink but did not manipulate the data.
Data Visualization
How were
thresholds
determined for
data categories?
The City used 10 quantiles to statistically represent equal observations per category.
How was the
data visualized?
The City visualized the data to illustrate low to high energy burden at the census
tract level.
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 163 164
Greenhouse Gas Reduction Calculation Methodology
To calculate the greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction target
of each Climate Action Plan pillar, the City modeled the
individual impact of actions and strategies developed
through the community- and stakeholder-engagement
process. Using Chicago’s 2017 GHG Emissions Inventory,
the City identified the baseline level of emissions-generating activity for each action. For example, the baseline for residential building actions in 2017 includes
total GHG emissions associated with electricity and
fuel consumption in the residential-building sector.
The analysis filtered baseline data further for specific
parts of Chicago addressed by each action, such as
residential buildings with four or fewer units. The City
then identified an average reduction in emission-generating activity for each action based on Chicagospecific studies and performance data maintained by
the City and its sister agencies. For example, the 2021
Chicago Energy Efficiency Planning and Analysis, and
Integrated Retrofit Strategy Validation in Single-Family
Homes project found an average 64 percent reduction
in energy use from comprehensive residential-building
efficiency retrofits. Applying these reduction factors
to the baselines, the City determined the change in
energy and other emissions-generating activities for
each strategy. Lastly, the City calculated the associated change in GHG emissions to determine the full
impact of each strategy. A coordinated model ensured
that reductions were counted only once across interacting strategies. The City further validated emissions
reduction potential by inputting actions into a separate
modeling tool (Pathways) developed by C40 Cities. The
reduction target of each pillar of the Climate Action
Plan combines the calculated reduction potential of
the underlying actions and strategies.
This page left intetntionally blank
CHISTARCHISTARCHISTARCHISTAR 2022 Chicago Climate Action Plan 165 166
CHICAGO
MAYOR LORI E. LIGHTFOOT