CLIMATE
ACTION PLAN
2021 EDITION
SEPTEMBER 27, 2021
2
LETTER FROM THE MAYOR.....................................................................................3
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS................................................................................................4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY...............................................................................................5
THE VISION: 2050 GOALS........................................................................................9
HOW TO READ THE CLIMATE ACTION PLAN............................................... 12
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 13
EQUITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE.....................................................23
STATIONARY ENERGY SECTOR (SES) GOALS............................................39
TRANSPORTATION SECTOR (TS) GOALS.....................................................65
WASTE AS A RESOURCE (WR) GOALS...........................................................94
PHOENIX RESILIENCE.............................................................................................118
FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY INITIATIVES.............................................118
AIR QUALITY (AQ) GOALS............................................................................ 119
LOCAL FOOD SYSTEM (LFS) GOALS...................................................... 128
HEAT (H) GOALS................................................................................................ 151
WATER (W) GOALS.......................................................................................... 174
REFERENCES.............................................................................................................. 187
ACTIONS MATRIX..................................................................................................... 191
TABLE OF CONTENTS
3
Phoenicians have a unique understanding of our
relationship with our environment. Here in the
heart of the Sonoran Desert, we know intimately
the importance of wise water management, living
with resilience to extreme heat, and the joys and
dangers of our monsoon season. While we are
not naïve to the immense challenges posed by
a warming climate, Phoenicians look with bold
vision toward the future. In 2015 voters declared
their commitment to making Phoenix the most
sustainable desert city on the planet.
This Climate Action Plan outlines actions necessary
to achieve this vision, charting the path to carbon
neutrality and zero waste by 2050 or sooner. It is
data-driven and uses the bi-annual greenhouse
gas emissions inventory conducted in partnership
with Arizona State University to establish baseline
emission levels and track progress. It is designed
as a living document, able to continuously respond
to the ever-changing and unique needs of our city
through regular updates. The effectiveness of the
actions outlined in this plan will be analyzed and
modeled with the support of C40 Cities, a global
network of leading cities working to mitigate
climate change.
I’d like to acknowledge the enormous time and
energy that city staff across departments have
dedicated to this project, with special thanks to the
Office of Environmental Programs for leading the
effort and driving collaboration among departments
and external stakeholders. Phoenix is proud to have
dedicated public servants who are committed to our
shared success. We also appreciate the time, ideas,
and feedback contributed by residents and other
stakeholders. The effectiveness of this plan depends
on the continued commitment of all collaborators,
both within the City of Phoenix and throughout
the community.
Climate action is not only a public health and
environmental imperative—it is central to ensuring
equity and accessibility, modernizing our economy,
fostering new jobs and talent in response to emerging
markets, and ensuring Phoenix remains competitive.
Companies in Phoenix are establishing climate goals
and developing the technologies that will power a
low-carbon, zero waste economy. We are poised to
drive the development of solutions that will support
the global paradigm shift to a more sustainable world.
Our city got its name from the symbolism of ‘rising
from the ashes’ of an ancient civilization, the
Hohokam people, who irrigated this land with canals
that serve as the foundation for the canal system we
depend on today. This valley has long been home
to resilient and enterprising people, and I believe
Phoenix has the ingenuity and courageous spirit to
honor this legacy and create a better city, and a better
world, for future generations to come.
Phoenix Mayor Kate Gallego
LETTER FROM
THE MAYOR
4
Office of Environmental Programs
Dr. Matthew Potzler
Nancy Allen
Rosanne Albright
Katrina Gerster
Karen Ibarra
Office of Sustainability
Mark Hartman
Nick Brown
Darice Ellis
Karen Apple
City Council Members
Kate Gallego, Mayor
Carlos Garcia, Vice Mayor and Councilmember, District 8
Ann O’Brien, Councilmember, District 1
Jim Waring, Councilmember, District 2
Debra Stark, Councilmember, District 3
Laura Pastor, Councilmember, District 4
Betty Guardado, Councilmember, District 5
Sal DiCiccio, Councilmember, District 6
Yassamin Ansari, Councilmember, District 7
City Manager’s Office
Ed Zuercher, City Manager
Karen Peters, Deputy City Manager
Department Climate Liaisons
Elizabeth Grajales, (retired), Office of Arts and Culture
Mitch Menchaca, Office of Arts and Culture
Ed Lebow, Office of Arts and Culture
Rebecca Godley, Aviation Department
Cynthia Parker, Aviation Department
Alexa Martin, Budget and Research Department
Monica Gonzalez, City Clerk Department
Michael Hammett, Communications Office
Alejandro Montiel-Cordova, Communications Office
Joseph Rossell, Community and Economic Development
Michael Campos, Phoenix Convention Center
Marquita Beene, Equal Opportunity Department
Donald Logan, Equal Opportunity Department
Rosalinda Erives, Equal Opportunity Department
Gustavo Nava, Finance Department
Zack Wallace, Finance Department
Rayne Gray, Fire Department
Kathya Hidalgo, Office of Government Relations
Yolanda Martinez, (retired), Housing Department
Terisha Ellis, Housing Department
Stephanie Zuffranieri, Human Resources Department
Ricardo Duran, Human Services Department
Felicia Thompson, Information Technology Services
Stephen Wetherell, Law Department
Monique Coady, Law Department
Todd Shackleford, Phoenix Public Library
Luis Aguilera, Phoenix Public Library
Sonia Murillo, Phoenix Public Library
Spencer Self, Neighborhood Services Department
Kimberly Dickerson, Neighborhood Services Department
Travis Ekenberg, Neighborhood Services Department
Brent Olson, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Management
Rick Templeton, (retired), Parks and Recreation Department
Cuong Dinh, Parks and Recreation Department
Danielle Poveromo, Parks and Recreation Department
Larry Polk, Parks and Recreation Department
Joshua Bednarek, Planning and Development Department
Odette Bakker, Planning and Development Department
Nikki Hicks, Police Department
Joe Bowar, Public Transit Department
Rodney Merrill, Public Transit Department
Kelly Murray, Public Transit Department
Felissa Washington Smith, Public Works Department
Brandie Barrett, Public Works Department
Keith Carbajal, Public Works Department
Mikaela Castle, Public Works Department
Marcia Wilson, Retirement Office
Kini Knudson, Street Transportation Department
Eric Froberg, Street Transportation Department
Lance Cosby, Water Services Department
Participants in Climate Action Projects
Arizona Commerce Authority
Arizona Department of Transportation
Arizona Public Service
Arizona State University
Bureau of Reclamation
City of Peoria
City of Tucson
First Southern Baptist Church
Grand Canyon University
Greater Phoenix Economic Council
Maricopa County Flood Control
Mr. Bults Inc.
Pueblo Grande Museum
Resource Innovation Campus
Salt River Project
Secretary of State’s Office
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Technical Assistance
C40 Cities
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thank you to the climate liaisons who contributed their efforts, expertise, and leadership to help create the
first community-wide climate action plan for all Phoenix.
Special thanks to Joe Gibbs, Retired
Thank you to Joe Gibbs, retired Air Quality Specialist, who
devoted many years of public service in the city of Phoenix and
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. Joe initiated
many programs that have improved the life of the residents of
Phoenix. We want to recognize Joe and thank him for all the
climate-related work he did previously that has allowed us
to reach completion of a climate action plan for all Phoenix.
Special thanks to Peggy Taylor
Thank you for your contributions as a
graphic artist to the plan’s community
outreach efforts.
5
Phoenix is a modern desert city with a unique backstory of human ingenuity and the harnessing of natural resources
to sustain life, dating back thousands of years to the Hohokam. For Phoenix to continue to rise and thrive, we need a
data-driven guidebook to address and overcome resource challenges and climate threats. This Climate Action Plan
will lead the way, providing an actionable framework for growth and development, while building a strong, equitable,
and resilient city.
Phoenix (“city”) is the fifth largest city in the U.S. and part of the fastest growing county in the nation. It is ranked as
the 4th most desirable city for millennials and the 11th best city to start a business. Its residents enjoy 300 days of
sunshine and have access to the largest municipal park system in the nation consisting of 48,000 acres of parks and
preserves. The Phoenix economy is strong. With direction from Mayor Gallego and the City Council and solid fiscal
management, the city realized a $158 million surplus in 2021.
To add to these successes, Phoenix voters supported an ambitious vision in the 2015 General Plan to become the
most sustainable desert city on the planet. A sustainable city improves the quality of life for everyone while
allowing nature to thrive.
The Phoenix City Council adopted the 2050 Sustainability Goals that set long-term outcomes necessary to fulfill this
vision, and now, this Climate Action Plan (CAP) proposes actions to put Phoenix on a path to achieving the ambitious,
long-term 2050 goals. In 2020, the city joined C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, a network of the world’s major
cities committed to addressing climate change. C40 has asked leading cites to commit to stop any rise in emissions
after 2020 as well as achieve carbon emissions reductions by 2030 to help curb global emissions and to limit
temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius or 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit.
Climate action planning is not new to Phoenix. Phoenix has invested $600 million in climate actions in recent
years including:
• $30 million in LED Streetlight project replacing 100,000 streetlights
• $16.9 million in a state-of-the-art compost facility
• $25 million in a biogas facility
• $30 million in retrofits underway to reduce energy use in city buildings
• $530 million in transit since 2016 under the Phoenix Transportation Plan (T2050) for
extended bus and paratransit operating hours, and increased local bus frequency to every
30 minutes or less citywide
• 45 miles of cool pavement installed—more than any other city in the world
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
GHG Emissions decreased from 2012 to 2018
while our population and the economy grew.
6
These actions and others have resulted in a decrease in per capita greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from 2012 to
2018, which is significant because this occurred when the city’s population grew 12% and the metro area economy
grew 26%. The goals identified in the plan will help prepare for the effects of climate change and put the city on a
path to reduce GHG emissions by a minimum of 50% by 2030 and to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050.
This Climate Action Plan was developed based on public and stakeholder input on the Climate Action Plan Framework
and Draft Climate Action Plan. It separates the goals and actions into the categories of energy, transportation, waste
and resilience. Highlighted below are significant goals identified in the plan for the city to achieve the vision:
Significant Climate Actions Included in This Report:
1. Create an inclusive and equitable city, prioritizing investments in previously underserved communities,
proactively seeking community input on all major climate policy and related budget decisions and embedding
equity in all climate actions.
2. Lead by example by transitioning city operations electrical use to carbon neutral by 2030 through energy use
reduction and implementation of local and utility scale solar projects.
3. Reduce community carbon emissions from buildings, transportation, and waste to move toward becoming a
carbon neutral city by 2050.
4. Support increased energy efficiency, renewable energy and new electric vehicle charging requirements
in building codes, to achieve carbon neutral buildings city-wide by 2050 with all new construction being
net-positive in both energy and materials by 2050.
5. Attract businesses that turn waste into resources and create a thriving Resource Innovation Campus by 2030 to
put the city on the path to zero waste by 2050.
6. Support and prepare for 280,000 electric vehicles in the city by 2030 and rapidly expand bus and High
Capacity Transit (Light Rail and Bus Rapid Transit) to achieve carbon neutral transportation by 2050.
7. Support new land use and development tools, such as the Walkable Urban Code, to prioritize people arriving
by walking, biking, or using transit, thereby reducing dependence on gasoline-fueled single occupancy vehicles;
particularly within and connecting to Transit Oriented Development Districts, Village Cores and Centers by
the year 2050.
8. Become a top tier Heat-Ready City by 2025—implementing the Tree and Shade Master Plan by 2030 and
building a network of 200 “cool corridors” by 2050.
9. Continue to lead internationally in water stewardship – providing a clean and reliable 100-year water supply.
10. Create and maintain a healthy, sustainable, equitable, and thriving local food system with healthy,
affordable and culturally appropriate food for all Phoenix residents by 2050.
11. Significantly improve air quality in the region to meet federal air quality standards.
The Pathway to Carbon Neutral by 2050
Phoenix has accomplished many initiatives, programs, and projects that have led to GHG reductions and provided
social, economic and environmental benefits. This plan details those accomplishments and maps out actions, some
underway now and some proposed, that will reduce GHG emissions in Phoenix. Many actions described in this plan
aim at strengthening community resilience and growth. This Plan is dynamic: it is built on community input and data.
Because the plan’s very foundation relies on new information, this plan will be updated at least every other year as
new information is available, technological innovations are made, and market conditions change.
7
GHG EMISSIONS IN PHOENIX
The city has completed GHG inventories for both city operations and community wide for several years. The most recent
inventory for 2018 showed that GHG emissions were down 0.5% from the baseline year of 2012. This decrease occurred
during a period where the city’s population grew 12% and the metro area economy grew 26%. Per capita emissions have
also decreased from 2012 to 2018. The map below shows the per capita emissions in large American cities.
GHG emissions are inventoried in three sectors: Stationary Energy, Transportation and Waste. The latest inventory from
2018 showed the following:
• THE STATIONARY ENERGY SECTOR – 51% OF GHG EMISSIONS.
GHG emissions occur from energy used in residential buildings, commercial buildings and facilities, manufacturing
industries, agriculture, forestry and fishing energy use, and electricity transmission and distribution energy losses.
GHG emissions from the Stationary Sector continue to decrease as the electricity grid decreases dependence on
fossil fuels and increasingly relies on renewable sources.
• THE TRANSPORTATION SECTOR - 47% OF GHG EMISSIONS.
GHG emissions occur from commercial and civil aviation, on road transportation, non-road vehicle use, freight and
light rail. GHG emissions from the Transportation Sector continue to increase along with population growth, with
the majority of emissions resulting from the use of gasoline-fueled vehicles.
• THE WASTE SECTOR – 2% OF GHG EMISSIONS.
GHG emissions occur from solid waste disposal, the biological treatment of waste (composting), and wastewater
treatment. The GHG emissions from the Waste Sector have decreased over time with the installation of landfill gas
capture systems and decreasing emissions from decommissioned landfills.
8
GHG reductions have been estimated using Phoenix data in C40’s Pathways model. According to C40 guidance, the
city used the most recent GHG inventory and expected population and economic growth to set a baseline or “Business
as Usual (BAU)” GHG emissions scenario. The city then modeled planned and proposed climate action strategies and
expected market changes to estimate potential GHG emissions reductions by sector.
Actions modeled in stationary energy include electric utilities’ grid decarbonization and solar goals and a national
executive order to have a carbon pollution-free electricity sector no later than 2035 along with increased use of green gas
to power businesses and homes.
Reductions in the transportation sector result from increased investment in a regional active transportation (walking and
cycling) network, increased public transit options, and a national executive order to increase sales of electric vehicles,
including hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles, to 50% of all new sales by 2030.
Waste sector reductions result from continued efforts to reduce waste city-wide along with EPA goals to increase recycling
to 50% by 2030 and to reduce food loss and food waste by 50% of 2010 values by 2030.
Currently, the city is on track to achieve a 50% GHG emissions reduction (below its 2018 baseline of 16,603,754 MT CO2eq)
by 2030 and will strive to go beyond that toward achieving net-zero emissions by 2050.
Getting Beyond 50% GHG Emissions Reductions by 2030
The city has identified 50% emissions reductions and seeks to go beyond as possible. This will require collaboration from
business, residents, and other government agencies, advancements in technology, market improvements, and potential
changes in policy or state legislation to occur. The city has initiated regional discussions with other cities, local and state
agencies, nonprofit organizations, and academic institutions to explore partnerships to address climate challenges, such
as heat and air quality. Phoenix will continue to develop new partnerships, advocate for policies at the municipal, state,
and federal level that will address our challenges, and engage and incorporate community input regularly and often.
C40 Pathways model showing 50% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030
as a result of city’s actions as described above and outlined in this plan.
9
Stationary Energy
All buildings will be powered with
net-zero GHG sources of energy. All
new buildings will be “net-positive” in
terms of energy and materials. At the
community scale, we will enhance 15
compact centers where the services
are provided locally. Residents will be
able to live, work and play, all within
walking or biking distance.
Transportation
All forms of transportation will be fueled
with net-zero GHG sources of energy.
Make walking, cycling, and transit
commonly used, enjoyed, and accessible
for every Phoenix neighborhood,
including our disabled community. This
goal will result in 90% of the population
living within one-half mile of transit,
and projects 40% of the population will
choose to commute by walking, biking,
transit or car share.
Waste as a Resource
Phoenix will create zero waste
through participation in the Circular
Economy where recycled materials
are repeatedly used in products,
instead of using raw materials.
Air Quality
Phoenix will achieve a level of air
quality that is healthy for humans
and the environment. Air quality will
meet U.S. EPA National Ambient Air
Quality Standards and World Health
Organization standards, and will
achieve a visibility index of good or
excellent on 90% of days or more.
Local Food System
Maintain a healthy, sustainable,
equitable, and thriving local food
system with healthy, affordable,
culturally appropriate food for
all residents.
Water
Provide a clean and reliable
100-year water supply.
Heat
Reduce urban heat-island effect
through green infrastructure as well as
doubling the current tree and shade
canopy to 25%. Have all residents
within a five-minute walk from a park
or open space by adding new parks
or open space in underserved areas,
adding 150 miles of paths, greenways,
and bikeways throughout the city, and
transforming an additional 150 miles
of canals into vibrant public space.
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
REDUCTIONS GOALS:
RESILIENCY
GOALS:
THE VISION: 2050 GOALS
10
THE PATH FORWARD: GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS GOALS
Stationary Energy Sector (SES)
Goal SES1: Achieve net-zero GHG emissions for municipal operations electricity use by 2030 through
renewable energy projects, energy efficiency upgrades, and utility partnerships.
Goal SES2: Support energy-efficiency upgrades to existing buildings throughout the city by developing
three new community-wide conservation and renewable-energy programs including
educational programs and incentives to conserve energy by 2025.
Goal SES3: Promote development of community-wide energy projects, including microgrids, that improve
the sustainability and resilience of the surrounding community’s electricity grid.
Goal SES4: Design and construct all new buildings within the city to Living Building Challenge, Net-Positive
Design, or equivalent design standards by 2050.
Goal SES5: Support policies and projects that that help shape an electricity grid that is net-zero GHG
emissions by 2050.
Transportation Sector (TS)
Goal TS1: Implement the city’s Complete Streets Policy and Active Transportation program to encourage
multiple modes of transportation, particularly within and connecting to Transit Oriented
Development Districts, Village Cores and Centers.
Goal TS2: Increase the community-wide use of low carbon fuels (i.e., fuels other than gasoline and diesel).
Goal TS3: Rapidly accelerate electric vehicle (EV) adoption in the community and expand publicly
accessible EV charging infrastructure throughout the city to result in 50% of all vehicle sales
being electric vehicles by 2030.
Goal TS4: Reduce the percentage of single occupant vehicle trips taken to 60% of all trips, through land
use and transportation investments that encourage walkable and transit oriented communities
while maintaining a thriving economy.
Waste as a Resource (WR)
Goal WR1: Implement programs to reduce waste, increase the reuse, recycling and recovery of waste
materials and promote social and economic value.
Goal WR2: Reduce GHG emissions resulting from the degradation of waste by capturing landfill gas and
converting 100% of the methane (up to 1,500 SCFM) from the SR 85 landfill into renewable
natural gas as a substitute for fossil natural gas. Have contract executed and facility
constructed and operational by March 2023.
Goal WR3: Increase waste-diversion participation by all residents and businesses.
Goal WR4: Transition to green alternatives from environmentally hazardous materials.
Goal WR5: Expand brownfield redevelopment along the Rio Salado in Phoenix.
Goal WR6: Reduce GHG from water and wastewater treatment by capturing biogas from treatment
processes and increasing renewable sources of energy.
11
Air Quality (AQ)
Goal AQ1: Meet U.S. EPA National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS).
Local Food System (LFS)
Goal LFS1: All people living in Phoenix will have enough to eat and have access to affordable, healthy,
local, and culturally appropriate food.
Goal LFS2: Businesses that produce, process, distribute, and sell local and healthy food will be recognized
as integral to the economy and encouraged to grow and thrive in Phoenix.
Goal LFS3: Growing food in Phoenix and the region will be easy and valued, for personal or business use.
Goal LFS4: Food-related waste will be prevented, reused, or recycled via sustainable food production
practices that maintain a healthy environment.
Goal LFS5: Develop food policies and actions that address local and global challenges posed by climate
change, urbanization, political and economic crises, population growth and other factors.
Heat (H)
Goal H1: Create a network of 100 cool corridors in vulnerable communities by 2030 to facilitate
movement of people walking, biking and using transit, particularly within and connecting to
Transit Oriented Development Districts, Village Cores, and Centers.
Goal H2: Increase shade provided by trees or constructed shade in ‘flatland parks’ (not preserves) and
street rights-of-ways to achieve a 25% tree and shade canopy in pedestrian areas by 2030,
prioritizing communities most vulnerable to heat, particularly within and connecting to Transit
Oriented Development Districts, Village Cores, and Centers.
Goal H3: Provide resources and services to residents to manage heat.
Goal H4: Increase the use of high albedo, or reflective, materials in infrastructure projects.
Goal H5: Develop HeatReady certification for cities in partnership with ASU by 2025.
Water (W)
Goal W1: Identify and implement infrastructure projects to ensure water security.
Goal W2: Improve conservation of water resources by improving stormwater management, optimizing
water use, conducting water audits, and utilizing wastewater.
Goal W3: Increase outreach and provide programs to residents and businesses to reduce water use to
155 GPCD by 2030.
THE PATH FORWARD: RESILIENCY GOALS
12
HOW TO READ THE CLIMATE ACTION PLAN
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reduction Goals
Reduce emissions of greenhouse gases to limit the
effects of climate change from the following sectors
Energy Sector Transportation Sector
Waste as a Resource
Resiliency
Goals
Increase resilience of the city against the effects
of climate change in the following focus areas
Air Quality Local Food System
Heat Water
TWO SETS OF GOALS
Each sector or focus area will have
goals with associated targets and
baselines and have this appearance
within the document. These goals
will be the Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) used to measure the
progress of the climate action plan.
GOAL 1
The goal’s
description.
TARGET 1
Measurable target
for each goal.
BASELINE
The starting
point.
Each goal will be followed by actions that will help meet the target and
will have an appearance like this example from the Stationary Energy
Sector (SES) Chapter.
Install solar energy generation systems on affordable
housing developments.
City housing developments will include solar power generation as
part of the APS Solar Communities Program. Solar installations will
promote equity in the distribution of resources to overburdened
communities, and will demonstrate our commitment to sustainability
investments in all of our communities.
Lead is responsible for the implementation
of the action and reporting on progress.
Identifies Action #
within that Goal Identifies Chapter Identifies Goal #
SES 1.1
 Actions that can be completed by 2025.
 Actions that are in progress.
 Actions being considered.
Quickstart Actions
Ongoing Actions
Pending Actions
Partner has a role in implementing the
action alongside the Lead.
1 2
CITY LEAD // Housing
PARTNERSHIPS // APS
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
2020-2025 2025- 2035 2035-2050
Short Term Medium Term Long Term
13
Greenhouse Effect and
Climate Change
GHG emissions from human activities have increased
dramatically over the past century and a half. These
emissions, primarily the burning of fossil fuels for
electricity, heating, and transportation, are accelerating
climate change. Sunlight warms the atmosphere
containing GHGs and the surface of the Earth. GHGs
absorb the heat and make the Earth suitable to sustain
life. With an increase in GHG concentrations from human
activities, more heat is absorbed and retained, rather
than being released back into space. This changes our
climate, affecting infrastructure, public health, and
management of natural resources.
INTRODUCTION
 (Source: National Park Service)
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Climate Change
GHGs include water vapor (H2O),
carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O),
methane (CH4) and fluorinated gases.
 (Source: National Park Service)
14
COMMUNITY-SCALE GHG EMISSIONS
The city of Phoenix has completed a community-scale greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions inventory for calendar year
2018 (the most recent inventory with an inventory for 2020 in progress) in partnership with Arizona State University
(ASU) Rob and Melani Walton Sustainability Solutions Service. The 2018 community-scale GHG inventory is the third
community-scale inventory completed by the city following the 2012 and 2016 community-scale GHG inventories. The
emissions inventories are conducted using the Global Protocol for Community-Scale GHG Emission Inventories (GPC)
measured in metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MT CO2eq). The GPC is a worldwide standard for quantifying
and reporting city-induced GHG emissions developed by the World Resources Institute, C40 Cities Climate Leadership
Group, and Local Governments for Sustainability (ICLEI). The GPC categorizes direct and indirect GHG emissions into
three sectors: Stationary Energy, Transportation, and Waste. Direct GHG emissions occur within city boundaries, while
indirect GHG emissions are induced by activity within the city boundary. In February 2021, the New York Times wrote
an article1
 about a study2
 that compared Northern Arizona University’s Vulcan carbon dioxide emissions data to selfreported inventories from U.S. cities, including Phoenix. Phoenix’s overall community-wide emissions for 2012, the
year in the study, were remarkably close to their estimates with only a 3% relative difference. Since the release of the
2012 greenhouse gas emissions inventory, the city has continued to make progress to refine the results from these
inventories with the aid of experts from ASU and Northern Arizona University.
• The Stationary Energy Sector includes GHG emissions that occur from energy used in residential buildings,
commercial buildings and facilities, manufacturing industries, agriculture, and forestry.
• The Transportation Sector includes GHG emissions from commercial and civil aviation, on-road transportation,
non-road vehicle use, freight and light rail.
• The Waste Sector includes GHG emissions from solid waste disposal, the biological treatment of waste
(composting), and wastewater treatment.
Understanding Phoenix’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Progress Towards Net-Zero Emissions
GDP
Total GHG Emissions
Per Capita GHG Emissions
Economic
Growth
Population
Growth
2018 GHG Inventory Results
26%
INCREASE
12%
INCREASE
16,692,626
MT CO2eq
11
MT CO2eq
per capita
2012
2012
2018
2018
16,603,754
MT CO2eq
10
MT CO2eq
per capita
15
LOCAL GOVERNMENT GHG EMISSIONS
The city of Phoenix has completed a municipal operations GHG emissions inventory for calendar year 2018 (the most
recent inventory with an inventory for 2020 in progress) for local government operations in partnership with ASU Rob
and Melani Walton Sustainability Solutions Service. The 2018 local government GHG inventory is the fourth completed
local government inventory by the city following the 2005, 2012, and 2015 GHG inventories. The local government GHG
emissions inventories are conducted using the Local Government Operations Protocol (LGOP), developed by Local
Governments for Sustainability (ICLEI), the California Climate Action Registry (CCAR), the California Air Resources Board
(CARB), and The Climate Registry (The Registry). The LGOP serves as a national standard for quantifying and reporting
emissions associated with government operations. The inventory includes emissions from those operations for which
the local government has the authority to introduce and implement operating policies, as those most accurately
represent GHG emissions sources within the city’s control. The inventory report is organized into five sectors:
Buildings and Facilities, City Vehicle Fleet, Water Distribution and Wastewater Treatment, Solid Waste, and
Employee Commute.
To view the greenhouse gas inventories for a more detailed analysis and methodology,
please visit https://www.phoenix.gov/climate
2018 Government Operations GHG Inventory Results
Solid Waste
Water Distribution and
Wastewater Treatment
City Vehicle Fleet
Employee Commute
Buildings and Facilities
23%
20%
5%
31%
21%
Progress Towards Net-Zero Emissions
Total GHG Emissions City Council Goals
15% 716,143 DECREASE
MT CO2eq
2005
2015 2025
2018
605,701
MT CO2eq
40%
DECREASE
ACHIEVED
16
Phoenix Climate Hazard Assessment
Located in the Sonoran Desert, summer temperatures in Phoenix can reach near 120 degrees Fahrenheit (F) or
49 degrees Celsius (C), with mild winter temperatures. The average annual precipitation is 7 inches or 178 mm.
Precipitation generally is divided equally between winter precipitation and summer monsoon storms that can deliver
intense rainfall in short periods of time. Recent global anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases are the highest in
history and the effects these emissions are having on climate are already being observed. The continued emission of
GHG gases will cause further warming and impact people and ecosystems, irreversibly so. These changes will be
long-lasting. Significant reductions in GHG emissions are required along with adaptation actions to limit risks due
to climate change. The predicted GHG emissions vary over a wide range and are dependent upon socio-economic
development and global climate policy.3
 The future will be hotter and the future will be drier, but those impacts will
not be experienced equally by all residents of Phoenix.
HEAT
Predicted average surface temperatures will increase mildly, if GHG emissions are moderately decreased
(Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5), or severely, if GHG emissions continue to increase unabated
(RCP 8.5).4
 All predictions indicate that surface temperature will increase over the 21st century and heat waves will
occur more often and last longer across the globe.
Exposure to hotter temperatures and heat waves has increased heat-associated deaths in Arizona. During high
ozone pollution advisory days, mortality risk is increased if concurrent with a heat wave. The region also has a
disproportionately high number of cases of West Nile virus, plague, hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, and Valley
fever cases. Wildfires have burned twice the area than what would have had climate change not occurred from
1984 until 2015.5
 Increased heat and drought will affect agriculture as heat stress reduces yield.6 The Maricopa County
Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan indicates that extreme heat events are highly likely for Phoenix and has a
high significance in emergency preparedness planning.7
DROUGHTS
The Southwest region has the hottest and driest climate of the United States. Higher temperatures are increasing
the drought in the Colorado River Basin and have resulted in a loss of 60% of the volume in Lake Mead, from which
Phoenix, along with other cities and agricultural users, draws water via the Central Arizona Project. Risk of water
shortages has increased as a result of reduced water volume in Lake Mead and Lake Powell. A Drought Contingency
Plan (DCP) was created by governments across the seven U.S. states that use of Colorado River water, the federal
governments of the U.S. and Mexico, and local water utilities. The DCP requires voluntary decreases in water use
to maintain levels at Lake Powell and Lake Mead. In addition, Arizona’s average monsoon rainfall is expected to be
reduced by 30-40% by 2100. The number of drought months will increase slightly under the low GHG emissions
scenario, but will increase for all areas of the city, especially for the northern and western areas. The Maricopa County
Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan shows droughts are likely and has moderate significance in emergency
preparedness planning.7
17
EXTREME HEAT: Maximum Summer Temperature
Phoenix recently completed a study in partnership with RTI International (formerly Research Triangle Institute)
and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to create a Phoenix-specific assessment regarding indicator-based
community vulnerability from site and waste management facilities following extreme events, including extreme
heat and drought. On the maps below, the darker the shade the higher the temperature.
Historical
(Average from 1986-2005)
Model of the Future
(Average from 2040-2059)
115 degrees F
(46 degrees C)
121 degrees F
(49 degrees C)
119 degrees F
(48 degrees C)
Moderate GHG Emissions Decrease
(RCP 4.5)
Business as Usual
(RCP 8.5)
18
DROUGHT: 12-Month Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index
On the maps below from the RTI/EPA study, the darker the shade the more months with drought.
Historical
(Total Drought Months from 1986-2005)
Model of the Future
(Average from 2040-2059)
44 Months
of Drought
Moderate GHG Emissions Decrease
(RCP 4.5)
Business as Usual
(RCP 8.5)
57 Months
of Drought
45 Months
of Drought
19
C40 Cities Deadline 2020
Created and led by the world’s cities, the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group connects 97 of the world’s leading cities,
representing one-twelfth of the population and one-quarter of the global economy. Phoenix joined C40 in 2020. In
2016, C40 released the Deadline 2020 report, providing a route map for C40 member cities to equitably work toward
the goals of the Paris Agreement to limit the temperature increase to 2.7 degrees F (1.5 degrees C) above pre-industrial
levels.8
CARBON BUDGET
In the Deadline 2020 research, C40 Cities calculated a carbon budget for member cities to help global warming stay
within 2.7 degrees F (1.5 degrees C) above pre-industrial levels. For Phoenix, that amount is 0.19 metric gigatons of
carbon dioxide equivalent (0.19 GTCO2eq).8
PER CAPITA EMISSIONS
To look at emissions across many cities globally, Deadline 2020 calculated an average per capita emissions goal of
2.9 MT CO2
eq per capita by 2030. It also allocated different typologies to cities, such as projected economic growth in
terms of their gross domestic product (GDP) and level of GHG emissions. Due to its comparatively high GDP and current
high emissions of 10 MT CO2
eq per capita (2018), Phoenix is in the category that calls for rapid decline in emissions
toward and beyond the 2.9 MT CO2
eq per capita by 2030 to carry its fair share of emission reductions and support all
cities meeting the goal.8
Achieving 50% and Aiming for 67% GHG Emissions Reductions by 2030
The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C
(SR1.5) stated that global GHG emissions must be reduced by 40-75% by 2030 to be on track toward the Paris Agreement
goal to keep warming to 1.5°C, and C40’s Deadline 2020 research indicates that cities like Phoenix should reduce
emissions by about 67% by 2030 to support that global goal as equitably as possible, assigning a greater reduction
goal for cities that already have higher emissions.9
With this plan, the city has modeled GHG emissions reductions of 50% from its 2018 baseline by 2030, and will work
to close the remaining 17% gap of emissions reductions with collaboration from business, residents, and other
government agencies, advancements in technology, market improvements, and potential changes in policy or state
legislation. Today there are barriers preventing the city from making the full commitment to the 67%, but anticipated
efforts at the national and state levels and by leading businesses will support the city’s work over time. For example,
fuel efficiency standards are likely to increase substantially between now and 2030 along with the increase in electric
vehicle sales and appliances will continue to become more efficient.
Using the C40 pathways model, the city has estimated what it would take to achieve a 67% reduction in emissions
by 2030 on track to net-zero by 2050 and identified a variety of barriers that impede that goal currently. As the city
implements the climate action plan, the city will continue to update the goals and planned actions and add additional
actions as barriers are reduced to achieve higher GHG emissions reductions.
387 GT CO2eq
97
22
0.19
Global
All cities with 100,000
residents or more
C40 Cities
Phoenix
20
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions Model
Phoenix used the Pathways model developed by C40 Cities to evaluate the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
|reductions that would result from planned and proposed climate actions. A Business as Usual (BAU) scenario was
first estimated using Phoenix’s previous GHG emissions inventories with predicted emissions in this scenario expected
to be 21,192,854 MT CO2
eq by 2030 and over 24,562,619 MT CO2
eq by 2050.10 The purpose of this work is to determine
what climate actions are feasible and can help the city meet the reductions necessary to support the goals of the
Paris Climate Agreement, achieving the city’s goal of at least 50% GHG reduction by 2030 from the 2018 baseline,
and becoming a net-zero GHG emissions city by 2050.
WHAT IS IN THE SCENARIO
The scenario includes the goals and commitments adopted by Mayor Kate Gallego and the members of the Phoenix
City Council, including the 2050 Sustainability Goals and C40 Cities Deadline 2020;11 actions planned by the Arizona
Public Service (APS)12 and Salt River Project (SRP);13 the Executive Order on Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home
and Abroad;14 expected market trends for electric vehicles, both battery electric and hydrogen fuel cell;15,16,17 and an
announcement from the federal administration and vehicle manufacturers that aims to increase sales of electric
vehicles to 50% by 2030.18 Transportation modeling used information from the Maricopa Association of Governments’
Active Transportation Plan19 and Travel Demand Model.20 Waste reductions modeling result from continued efforts to
reduce waste city-wide with a zero waste goal by 2050 along with EPA goals to increase recycling
to 50% by 203021 and to reduce food loss and food waste by 50% of 2010 values by 2030.22
In the creation of this plan, additional actions were proposed including increased deployment of solar and use of
green gas to substitute natural gas use, increased transition of trips from solo driving to more use of transit and
walking and biking.
C40 Pathways model showing 50% and 67% reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions by 2030 and net zero by 2050.
21
The model shows reductions by sector that will result in a minimum 50% decrease in GHG emissions from the 2018
inventory baseline by 2030. The yellow shaded area indicates the amount of GHG emissions that still need to be
addressed to meet the city’s Deadline 2020 target of a 67% reduction below its 2018 baseline. The city has considered
what it would take to meet that goal and determined that these actions are not feasible at this time, but the city will
continue to work with partners toward this goal and add actions that support it.
To reach a 67% reduction below the 2018 baseline by 2030, a number of additional actions are indicated by the
modeling. For the stationary energy sector, the grid would need to be further decarbonized with a significant increased
use of green gas that is not considered feasible at this time. Transportation would need to be split into roughly equal thirds of
travel by active transportation, public transit with the remaining third being primarily in electric vehicles. Emissions from the
waste sector are low and are already being addressed as much as feasibly possible in the current actions.
By 2050, the remaining emissions are from the transportation and waste sectors. For transportation, the GHG emissions
are from those modes of transportation that are not easily electrified like airplanes, off-road vehicles and railways/
trains. The remaining emissions from the waste sector are from landfill gas from already in place material. The city
will continue to monitor those emissions and will develop actions to balance those remaining emissions actions to
sequester or offset them.
Overcoming Barriers to Meeting our Climate Action Goals
The city of Phoenix has worked collaboratively across departments and with a wide array of stakeholders to develop
this ambitious climate action plan. In this process, a number of barriers that can affect the progress of climate action in
Phoenix have have been identified. These are categorized by type according to C40 guidance for barriers analysis. The
city has selected the actions in this plan in the context of these barriers, and the lead departments for each action will
work with partners to address these where applicable. The Office of Environmental Programs will monitor and update
these barriers with future climate action plan reporting and updates.
LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL
The implementation of the climate action plan will require the city of Phoenix to work with partners across multiple
sectors, since it lacks legal and institutional authority to completely implement all actions necessary on its own.
For the Stationary Energy Sector, the city must rely on the electric utility companies and their regulator the Arizona
Corporation Commission (ACC) to meet state and national energy goals. The city can implement direct strategies
through investments in clean energy and energy efficiency improvement projects, which include over 40 behind-themeter solar projects on city properties and projects like LED streetlighting.
In the Transportation Sector, motor vehicle emissions are regulated at the federal level, while regional transportation
planning falls under the Maricopa Association of Governments, and the Valley Metro Transit System is the organization
responsible for public transit. The city must coordinate with these partners to support more ways for residents to
reduce car use and take public transit, bike or walk. The city can support its goals directly with increased transitoriented development and active transportation infrastructure such as protected bike lanes, while also promoting the
use of electric vehicles with investments in electric vehicle infrastructure and community education and outreach.
In the Waste Sector, the State has pre-empted the banning of single-use plastic bags. Also, the city can only offer
recycling to single-family households, per a city ordinance. This means that multi-family complexes and businesses
must receive trash and recycling services from a private hauler. The city worked with the Arizona Multi-Housing
Association to create an ordinance requiring that new multi-family complexes build in dedicated capacity for recycling.
22
Arizona has adopted self-imposed constraints limiting the state’s authority to regulate beyond the scope of Federal
authority. For Arizona, rules must be examined to ensure that they are “…consistent with and no more stringent than the
corresponding federal law that addresses the same subject matter.” (ARS 49-104(A)(17). This makes it difficult for the city
and state to go beyond national ambition, and the expected national investment in climate action should support the
city’s goals but much of that work is still underway.
FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC
Many climate actions require significant funding to implement, including increased public transit and renewable energy
generation. For example, funding for Transportation 2050 that will increase public transit options is estimated to be $31.5
billion over 35 years. Increases in the uptake of electric vehicles is expected to come when electric vehicles reach price
parity with internal combustion engines. The Arizona Corporation Commission recently released a study that showed the
costs to transition to 100% GHG reductions by 2050 and found that this will increase costs to residential customers from
$18 per month by 2035 to $60 month by 2050.23
The city continually investigates different financial tools to implement sustainability projects. The city has developed
one of the nation’s first Sustainability Bond Frameworks to attract new investors interested in supporting sustainable
infrastructure. These types of bonds were used for the city’s water infrastructure, which include the Drought Pipeline
Project, which will provide water to areas of the city dependent on water sources that are currently decreasing due to
climate change.
POLITICAL AND SOCIAL
Political and social considerations were taken when developing the climate action plan. For example, many
individuals prefer or need to travel alone in their passenger vehicles. As this is the case, focus in the plan was made
to transition more internal combustion engine vehicles to electric vehicles and to increase public transit options to
make it more convenient. Many of the successful initiatives found within the plan required political acceptance and
support to implement. To continue this success, further outreach will need to be completed to show the financial and
environmental benefits from pursuing climate action. In addition, regional collaboration will be necessary to accomplish
transportation and air quality goals. Actions within the plan include advocating for policies at the municipal, state and
federal levels to accomplish these goals.
PRACTICAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL
Practical and technological barriers exist in the implementation of public transit options, electric vehicle deployment
and renewable energy generation. Transportation options are difficult to implement in a city as widespread as Phoenix
where an average trip distance is 18 miles. Many of the public comments were to increase public transit options to make
it more convenient to travel that way. Electric vehicle deployment will require significant infrastructure upgrades for
residents and businesses to be able to power these vehicles. Electric vehicle options for medium- and heavy-duty options
are limited at this time. Electric buses are not feasible for use as public transit in Phoenix due to the increased energy
requirements for air conditioning. Transitioning to an electrical grid reliant on renewable energy will require storage
options that are currently not available at this time to ensure reliability.
23
EQUITY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL
JUSTICE
24
Phoenicians are already experiencing impacts from climate change, from hotter, drier summers to
record-breaking fire seasons and floods that require years for communities to fully recover.
We are all impacted by climate change, but some experiences these impacts much more acutely than others.
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color, lower-income individuals, historically underrepresented groups, children
and older adults, and those experiencing multiple environmental burdens are disproportionately impacted by
climate change. Our climate action will not succeed without including all Phoenicians, especially the
overburdened communities.
Overburdened or disproportionately impacted communities must be identified, and involved in climate action processes.
How Climate Change Impacts Overburdened Communities
Overburdened Communities
Overburdened communities are, as
defined by EPA: Minority, low-income,
tribal, or indigenous populations or
geographic locations in the United
States that potentially experience
disproportionate environmental harms
and risks. This disproportionality can
be as a result of greater vulnerability
to environmental hazards, lack of
opportunity for public participation, or
other factors. Increased vulnerability may
be attributable to an accumulation of
negative or lack of positive environmental,
health, economic, or social conditions
within these populations or places. The
term describes situations where multiple
factors, including both environmental and
socio-economic stressors, may act
cumulatively to affect health and the
environment and contribute to persistent
environmental health disparities
Climate change intensifies adverse conditions for people already
burdened by historic and current harms to health, social wellbeing,
political agency, economic conditions, and/or environmental
quality. Communities already dealing with these existing burdens
are more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.
Existing disparities are worsened by climate change impacts. In
Phoenix, heat extremes and poor air quality from wildfires impact
individuals and families who may already be dealing with chronic
health conditions, inadequate healthcare or insurance, or a lack of
clear and reliable information.
Every action is a climate action. All aspects of society including,
in part, our health, our economy, and our food systems are
directly influenced by climate change. Our climate strategies
must use this logic to understand the potential impacts, both
positive and negative, direct and indirect, on overburdened and
disproportionately impacted communities. Using the values as
described by Colorado’s Air Pollution Control Division Climate Equity
Framework24 will help us do that:
VALUE 1: Equitable Representation - The Climate Action Planning
process should provide easily accessible opportunities for any
interested person to participate.
VALUE 2: Prioritizing Benefits - Climate Action Planning strategies
with the potential to provide benefits to individuals or communities,
overburdened communities should be prioritized.
VALUE 3: Economic Impacts - Climate Action Planning strategies
should reduce costs, including currently externalized costs, and
increase economic benefits for overburdened communities
wherever possible.
EQUITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE
25
VALUE 4: Health Impacts - Climate Action Planning strategies should minimize negative health impacts and
increase health benefits for disproportionately impacted communities.
VALUE 5: Access to Solutions - Climate Action Planning strategies should promote clean technologies in ways that
are equitable for all living in Phoenix.
VALUE 6: Building Resilience - Climate Action Planning strategies should improve resilience and quality of life for
overburdened communities.
Community Engagement
A key component of equitable and just climate action is effective community outreach and engagement. Policies
that are shaped by community and stakeholder input are more likely to have better outcomes. Phoenix will
facilitate meaningful ways for people to engage early and often throughout the process. Thoughts, perspectives
and ideas generated through engagement will be documented and taken into account as policy and programs are
formulated.
BEST PRACTICES
1. Understand, respect, and acknowledge the histories of marginalization and mistrust
Overburdened communities have experienced a long history of systemic racism and classism. A combination
of unjust laws, and unconscious bias among other things, have left many communities mired in longstanding societal inequities. This history has often fostered mistrust within impacted and disenfranchised
communities. Mistrust hampers engagement with communities if not given special and explicit attention.
Phoenix will build trust by:
• Continuing to include racially and ethnically diverse representation on advisory groups, boards
and commissions.
• Asking the right question such as, “What mistakes have been made in the past? How did
government agencies contribute to the experiences of communities? What specific types of
marginalization (geographic, linguistic, economic, racial discrimination, etc.) are communities
facing and how do these intersect with climate change?”
• Offering multiple ways for community members to engage and recognize the varying levels of
voice, power, and impact that they afford.
2. Manage expectations by being straightforward and by providing clear processes and information.
We understand the need to build trust and that community members may be disconnected from programs,
policy decisions and initiatives. Clear scopes as well as clear engagement processes will be developed and
implemented for each action.
The city can clearly and transparently communicate by:
• Presenting the scope of work so that community members understand how they a) can and
cannot engage; b) when they can and cannot comment; c) how their engagement can impact
outcomes, and: d) how they can connect with others both at the local and regional levels.
• Clearly communicating the roles, responsibilities, and capacities of those involved including fully
and clearly disclosing limitations and constraints that are present.
• Using regular, consistent and accessible communication channels to communicate early and
often (throughout the entire process) so that the community remains informed.
26
3. Use Effective Modes of Community Engagement and Communication
Community engagement can generally be classified into five types: inform, consult, involve, collaborate, and
empower. The appropriate level of engagement will vary depending on the scope of the project or program or
situation.
4. Prioritize local knowledge and concerns.
The unique character of Phoenix’s various communities has been formed through difference and diverse sets
of circumstances. Individual cultures, social and economic networks, and histories all play a part in making
Phoenix such a dynamic place to live, play and work. Phoenix’s diversity provides opportunities to leverage local
knowledge to affect positive change. The diversity of experience is also a powerful tool in creating lasting change,
as communities have an incredible range of assets to contribute to the process.
Phoenix will elevate local knowledge and concerns by:
• Holding listening sessions, workshops, and community conversations to understand the
concerns and needs of community members. Part of this is to provide space for community
members and leaders to elevate their existing issues of concern, beyond government-determined
agendas and priorities.
• Making a concerted effort to identify and work with new groups, especially those that address
systems-level perspectives on climate equity, not just the typical advocacy organizations.
• Continually cultivating partnerships with community partners.
5. Supporting the protection of the well-being, interests, and rights of communities.
Phoenix is prioritizing outreach to and engagement with disproportionately impacted communities as they are
especially vulnerable to the potential impacts of the climate crisis.
Phoenix can protect the well-being, interests, and rights of communities by:
• Actively seeking input and guidance from the community members on a regular basis.
• Providing clear and easy access to accurate and understandable data and information to help
communities stay informed.
6. Earn trust through partnerships and collaborations.
Partnerships are essential to successful community engagement. Building relationships with community leaders
and organizations is one of the most important undertakings when engaging disproportionately impacted
communities. Building partnerships will help Phoenix keep the needs and concerns of the community at the
forefront of the engagement process. Having individuals, committees, and organizations that can help ground
the work in the community’s concerns will help ensure that the legacies of mistrust and ineffective action are not
continued.
Phoenix can nurture partnerships that engender community trust by:
• Hosting or co-host events with local partners where community organizations, groups, and
advocacy organizations can meet to develop connections and relationships.
• Participate in existing community activities and events, to make it easier and more time-efficient
for community members to engage.
• Identifying and working with existing organizations doing climate change work at the local level,
including local government and community-based organizations, among others.
• Identifying and working with groups who are representative of the community.
• Looking for ways to elevate and address community concerns and to channel projects that will
benefit communities.
27
Local Government Leading the Way
1. PRIORITIZING - and considering communities of color, other marginalized groups, and those who experience the
vulnerability to climate change and are most impacted by heat and air quality related issues. As a few examples:
a. In 2021, City Council approved to create a new department in the City Manager’s Office: The Office of Diversity,
Equity & Inclusion. This new department will align city actions to prioritize diversity, equity and inclusion—
actively seeking input from and connecting with diverse communities.
b. The Human Services Department joins cities across the region in a nationally recognized Heat Relief Network
to work with partner organizations to perform outreach and education to vulnerable populations and connect
them with cooling centers, hydration stations, and other city services.
c. The Street Transportation Department has developed a Heat Vulnerability Walkshed Tool to help identify
neighborhoods that will benefit the most from the Cool Corridors Program—to prioritize street tree planting in
heat vulnerable neighborhoods
d. The Neighborhood Services Department delivers a Low-Income Weatherization Assistance Program focused
on decreasing energy consumption and improving indoor air quality for residences within the 200% Federal
Poverty Level.
e. The Office of Environmental Programs is leading on environmental justice by developing air quality and
emission inventories across all communities to identify and target programs towards communities most
impacted by poor air quality.
f. The Housing Department is leading a community-driven redevelopment effort as part of the Choice
Neighborhoods redevelopment of the Edison-Eastlake Community. This effort includes LEED for Neighborhood
Development (LEED ND) certification and architectural guidelines that create “Enterprise Green Communities”
to provide a new mixed-income, energy-efficient housing development that will become a showcase of
sustainable development.
g. The city has recently established the Office of Heat Response and Mitigation to lead the implementation of the
Tree and Shade Master Plan and coordinate efforts across all city departments to prioritize communities most
impacted by heat by optimizing city investments in infrastructure to mitigate the effects of urban heat island.
2. INCLUSIVITY – creating spaces and addressing specific areas of the Climate Action Plan with greater dialogue where
these residents feel welcome to participate with their experiences. Departments across the city are increasing their
efforts to receive community input on city programs by reaching out to our diverse populations through partner
organizations well-respected in the community. As a few examples:
a. The city is expanding its efforts to advance equity and help residents lead lives with dignity through its newly
established Office of Diversity, Equity and Inclusion with a vision to create better outcomes and eliminate
barriers throughout city policies, programs and relations.
b. The city is expanding its outreach to youth and adding their voice to future policies and programs that will
affect their future. This CAP hosted workshops specifically for youth to seek their input, and engaged youth
leaders through the High School Sustainability Officer program.
28
EQUITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE
CLIMATE ACTION PLANNING PROCESS
Timeline
29
Climate Liaisons
Climate Liaisons are City Staff from 29 departments across the city that have contributed to the development of
the climate action plan by writing the plan, presenting and facilitating at community events. The individuals are
members of staff that report directly to the director-level to provide the most up-to-date information and to ensure the
decisionmakers are included in the climate action planning process. The 29 departments are:
Climate Action
Plan Framework
The Climate Action Plan Framework contains
climate-related goals and actions already underway
by the city of Phoenix and was used as a starting
point to begin the community-wide climate action
planning process. The Framework was created by
the Climate Liaisons and informed the residents
of Phoenix as to what programs and policies are
already in place or in progress for their input. The
Framework can be found at https://www.phoenix.
gov/climate/ The Framework was available for
public comments from October 2020 to February
2021. Phoenix residents could provide comments
via a survey online, workshops, or via email.
We received 1,553 total comments that were
incorporated into the draft climate action plan.
Office of Arts and Culture
Aviation Department
Budget and Research Department
City Clerk Department
Communications Office
Community and Economic Development
Phoenix Convention Center
Office of Environmental Programs
Equal Opportunity Department
Finance Department
Fire Department
Office of Government Relations
Housing Department
Human Resources Department
Human Services Department
Information Technology Services
Law Department
Phoenix Public Library
Neighborhood Services Department
Parks and Recreation Department
Planning and Development Department
Police Department
Public Transit Department
Public Works Department
Retirement Office
Street Transportation Department
Office of Homeland Security and
Emergency Preparedness
Office of Sustainability
Water Services Department
30
Impressions on Nextdoor
about climate action
Village Planning
Committee
Presentations
Survey advertised in PAYS
August 2020 newsletter
Extreme temperatures
and heat waves
Prolonged and extreme
drought conditions
Decreased air quality
Promoting working from home
Make walking and bicycling
more accessible
Improve bus and
light rail options
Community input on the climate action was first elicited from the residents of Phoenix starting with a survey available online in summer
2020 and received 846 total responses with 605 responses from Phoenix residents. The survey asked about climate-related hazards,
top recommended actions, community benefits that were most important, ways to decrease single occupancy vehicle travel, major
barriers to addressing climate change, and preferred method of communication. Community outreach was primarily conducted virtually.
Lack of government mandated
regulations/support
Difficulty in changing habits
City of Phoenix website
Online Community Events
and Workshops
Social media
15
COMMUNITY INPUT
PHASE 1: SUMMER KICK-OFF SURVEY
50,000+
75%
EXTREMELY
CONCERNED WITH:
MAJOR
BARRIERS:
MAKE IT EASIER TO
GET AROUND BY:
PREFERRED MEANS
OF COMMUNICATION:
31
Stationary Energy
Microgrids and new conservation and
renewable-energy programs
Transportation
Implement Complete Streets Policy and
Active Transportation Program and Increase
EV and EV Infrastructure
Waste
Increase reuse and recovery of waste materials
and transition to green alternatives
Air Quality
Decrease ozone precursor emissions
Local Food Systems
Affordable, healthy, local, and culturally
appropriate food for all
Heat
Increase Shade and create
Cool Corridor Network
Water
Improve conservation of water resources
“No Carbon Emissions by 2030… 2050 is
way too late.” -Survey Respondent
Unlimited Potential
American Society of Civil Engineers
Arizona Green Chamber of Commerce
Arizona State University
Sustainable Cities Network
Heat Preparedness and
Resilience Workgroup
The Climate Action Plan Framework was released in October 2020 for public input. Outreach for the Framework was available in
English and Spanish and included online surveys, presentations, workshops, social media, email comments and radio and television
interviews. We received 487 responses to two surveys, had 186 workshop and 150 presentation participants, and 34 emails with
comments related to climate action.
186
PARTICIPANTS
Youth Workshop
co-hosted with Office of Sustainability’s
Phoenix Union High School Sustainability
Officer Program
“Please make sure this plan for 2050 is
implemented equally across low- and
high-income communities. If it isn’t, this
could easily make class disparities
worse.” – Youth Workshop Participant
English with real-time
Spanish Translation Workshop
co-hosted with CHISPA Arizona
Workshop focused on Energy, Heat and
Water Sectors
Workshop focused on Air Quality, Energy,
Heat, Transportation and Waste
5
PRESENTATIONS
150
PARTICIPANTS
TOP SUPPORTED 487 GOALS
SURVEY
RESPONSES
4
VIRTUAL
WORKSHOPS
34
EMAILS
COMMUNITY INPUT
PHASE 2: CLIMATE ACTION PLAN FRAMEWORK
32
The Draft Climate Action Plan was released in June 2021 in English and July 2021 in Spanish for public input through August 2021. A
survey, offered in both paper and online versions, was made available in both English and Spanish in June 2021. Outreach for the Draft
included virtual workshops, social media, email comments, news articles, and radio and television interviews. The city received 2,172
completed surveys with 1,308 written comments, had 348 workshop participants, and 53 emails with comments related to climate
action. In addition, there were over 399,000 social media impressions from 173,000 users and 444,000 impressions from GroceryTV
ads, which are available in grocery stores. The phoenix.gov/climate webpage received 4,181 total page views during the comment period
June 1 – August 13, 2021.
COMMUNITY INPUT
PHASE 3: CLIMATE ACTION PLAN
399,000
SOCIAL MEDIA IMPRESSIONS
2,172
PARTICIPANTS
SOCIAL MEDIA
SURVEY
440,000
GROCERY TV AD IMPRESSIONS
161
SPANISH SURVEYS
348
PARTICIPANTS
Business and Climate co-hosted with Community
and Economic Development Department
Water and Climate co-hosted with
Water Services Department
Advocating for Equitable Heat Solutions in the
Phoenix Climate Action Plan co-hosted with
Union of Concerned Scientists
The Air We Breathe: Climate Equity in Phoenix
co-hosted with Vice Mayor Carlos Garcia, Councilmember
Yassamin Ansari, Chispa Arizona, and the
American Lung Association
The Future of Phoenix: Youth Climate co-hosted with
AZ Youth Climate Coalition and Sunrise Movement Tempe
Your Community and Climate
Draft Climate Action Plan Virtual Workshop with
Districts 7 and 8
Draft Climate Action Plan Workshop with
Arizona Green Chamber
8
VIRTUAL WORKSHOPS
53
EMAILS
15
VILLAGE PLANNING
COMMITTEE PRESENTATIONS
81%
of participants are
 concerned about drought
(continued)
33
TOP 5
VERY REALISTIC ACTIVITIES TO
LIMIT CLIMATE CHANGE
Recycle
Use Energy Efficient
Lightbulbs and Appliances
Buy Greener Products
Buy Local Food
Plant Trees
THEME 1:
PAY
38% of responses contained the idea of payment
in the context of taxes, incentives, money, cost of
living, limited funds, low-cost programs, and the
cost of climate change mitigation measures for the
city, the community, and individual households.
“We are retired, in social security. Money is SO
tight. Our budget does not allow us to participate
in most of these programs. Local produce costs
more. Electric cars cost more etc., etc.”
THEME 2:
OUTDOOR SPACES
32% of responses included ideas surrounding
outdoor spaces, including gardens, parks, trees,
shade, landscaping, construction, rooftops, streets,
and water reservoirs.
“Consider some bigger changes – community solar
projects, white streets for reducing heat, increased
shade sails, solar on city buildings, grey or black
water recycling for non-potable water reuse in
buildings and homes, storm water collection and
aquifer recharge.”
THEME 3:
TRANSPORTATION
17% of responses mentioned transportation and
transportation infrastructure, including bikes
and bike lanes, roads, scooters, electric vehicles,
charging stations, and buses and bus stops.
“Electric vehicles are here now. I live
in an apartment and come to the library 2x per
week. I would buy an electric vehicle if the
library had a charger.”
SURVEY
(continued)
1,137
PARTICIPANTS
would be more likely
to participate in
climate change activities if
“It saved me money”
“Plant trees in neighborhoods
that do not currently have
shade trees was the most
urgent activity for the city of
Phoenix to address”
1,308
WRITTEN COMMENTS
34
Climate Action Plan Monitoring, Evaluation, and Reporting (MER)25
The city’s work to implement climate action will be guided by this plan and the city has committed to regular
reporting and updates. The work and reporting will be supported by the climate liaisons in 29 departments
and coordinated by the Office of Environmental Programs. The way in which the various stakeholders work
together is outlined in this organigram:
GOVERNANCE AND STRUCTURE
Phoenix has a form of government called the council-manager plan. Phoenix’s council-manager plan has a mayor,
eight council members each representing a council district, and a city manager. The mayor and council members set
the policy for the city, while the city manager is hired to manage day-to-day operations of the city and advise the city
council about these operations when setting policy. The city manager is in charge of more than 13,000 employees.
The city government has three branches, mayor and city council are the legislative branch, the city manager is the
executive branch, and the municipal court is the judicial branch. To view the city’s organization chart, please visit
https://www.phoenix.gov/departments
Climate Action Planning MER System
35
MONITOR
To track the progress of the plan, Goals were established within each sector with a measurable Target, indicators that will
be observed with some to be determined, and a Baseline used as a reference point to track the difference. The Targets are
the plan’s indicators and will be monitored by the Climate Liaisons established by City Management. Climate Liaisons are
City Staff from across the city who will serve as each department’s experts and will be able to effectively monitor progress
and provide that information to update the plan. Climate Liaisons will also track the progress of each action where their
department is the Lead. Progress on both Targets and actions will be monitored continuously by the Climate Liaisons and
will be made available for the regular updates of the climate action plan.
EVALUATE
Evaluation of the plan will occur partially every two years, with a full update every five years. The evaluation will primarily
focus on the progress of short term actions to ensure they are completed and keep the climate action plan on track. The
greenhouse gas emissions inventory will primarily be used to evaluate whether or not the city is meeting its targets for
greenhouse gas emissions reductions for the mitigation sectors of the plan and what additional steps will need to be
taken to stay on track. Future editions of the greenhouse gas emissions inventory will also be improved to address items
that were found to need additional monitoring or to improve the effectiveness of future evaluation cycles. The Targets
established for the resiliency sectors will require multiple sources of data as to determine how much progress is being
made, including items like air quality monitoring, implementation levels across communities, hazard risk assessments,
etc. As the plan progresses, it will be evaluated for cost effectiveness, how effectively it reduces greenhouse gas
emissions, and if overburdened communities are the focus of the implementation of the plan. Depending on the progress
towards targets and cost of that progress, recommendations can be made by the Climate Liaisons to their leadership and
city management to receive feedback, guidance, and additional resources for future implementation that will improve
progress of the plan. These recommendations will also be coordinated and shared to all departments to increase the
plan’s effectiveness.
REPORT
Reporting of the implementation of the plan will be completed similarly to the development of the plan itself. The city
will conduct outreach activities that will include community workshops, presentations to various social, professional
and community-based organizations, news outlets, and obtain additional feedback from residents on their current
needs and their perspective of the implementation of the plan. The city also reports annually to CDP using its CDP-ICLEI
Unified Reporting system on greenhouse gas emissions and adaptation efforts. This information is shared globally to
organizations like C40 Cities, Global Covenant of Mayors, carbonn Climate Registry (cCR), and report progress on the city’s
commitments on initiatives like the Race to Zero. Overall, the city envisions a continual review, engagement, and revision
process for climate action planning, using the best and latest data to guide this process, and continually improving the
city’s Pathway to Net-Zero. The actions and goals within the plan will be reviewed every two years at the same time as the
city updates its municipal operations and community-scale GHG emissions inventories. The progress toward goal targets
will be updated, when possible, as some actions may require a longer timeframe to note progress. The Maricopa County
Multi-Jurisdiction Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan (MJHMP) is updated every five years and provides hazard information that
will be used as a part of updating the climate action plan. At the time of the MJHMP update, the entire climate action plan
will be revised. Depending on the results of the GHG inventories, the GHG emissions reduction pathway model also will
be revised. Based on the updated model and the continual input from the community and city departments, adjustments
will be made to the plan to ensure that the city will achieve its goal of becoming a net-zero GHG emissions city by 2050.
36
FUTURE CLIMATE SPECIFIC WORK
Greenhouse Gas Inventories
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY-SCALE
GHG emissions inventories have been conducted for local government for calendar years 2005, 2012, 2015, and
2018. Community-wide GHG emissions inventories have been conducted for calendar years 2012, 2016, and 2018.
Both inventories are in progress for calendar year 2020. In the future, local government and community-scale
inventories will continue to be conducted every two years. This will inform decisionmakers as to the effectiveness
of the climate action plan. To view the available inventories, please visit https://www.phoenix.gov/climate
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND OTHER LAND USE (AFOLU)
Agriculture, Forestry, and Other Land Use (AFOLU) considers the emissions and sequestration of carbon from
sources and sinks in agriculture, forestry and other land use. Emissions from this sector are approximated to
be one-quarter of all anthropogenic GHG emissions mainly from deforestation and agricultural emissions from
livestock, soil and nutrient management.26 This sector will be included as part of the calendar year 2020 GHG
emissions inventory to estimate GHG emissions from Phoenix’s food system. The inventory will consider the
GHG emissions from food system elements like producing, processing, and transporting the food all the way to
determining the best way to dispose of food waste. By adding this analysis to the GHG emissions inventory, a more
efficient local food system can be developed that will be able to provide food to residents, while minimizing the
associated GHG emissions.
KYOTO PROTOCOLS
The Kyoto Protocol is an international treaty
which extends the 1992 United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) and applies to these six greenhouse
gases: carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide,
hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and
sulfur hexafluoride.27 Currently, Phoenix’s GHG
inventories estimate emissions from three
greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide, methane, and
nitrous oxide. Emissions of hydrofluorocarbons,
perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride are
low in Phoenix, but these chemicals have high
global warming potentials or the ability to absorb
more heat than carbon dioxide. As the emissions
of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide
decrease, emissions of the remaining gases will
become significant and will be included in the
city’s 2026 GHG emissions inventory to accurately
estimate the emissions.
Source: Texas Center for Local Food28
37
CONSUMPTION-BASED
Consumption-based inventories include GHG emissions produced within the city and GHG emissions that come about
as a result of consumption of goods and services that come from outside the city. These imported goods and services
are attributed to the cities where they are consumed. The GHG emissions include those from production outside
the city, the transportation to the city, use within the city, and finally GHG emissions from disposal.29 It is estimated
that a consumption-based inventory will show higher GHG emissions than the traditional approach. Taking the
consumption-based approach will allow for the residents of Phoenix to understand the impact of their consumption
on GHG emissions. A consumption-based GHG emissions inventory will be conducted for calendar year 2022.
THIRD-PARTY VERIFICATION
GHG inventories need to be verified by a third-party to ensure that the data being presented is accurate and
comparable to other inventories. Phoenix either voluntarily reports to or has committed to reporting GHG inventories
to C40 Cities, CDP (formerly Carbon Disclosure Project), and Global Covenant of Mayors. U.S. EPA also recommends
third-party verification.30
C40 Cities–Recommended
C40 Cities recommends an external review of
the GHG inventory for data quality assurance
and verification as part of the development of
the inventory.31
CDP–Required
Phoenix reports GHG emissions to CDP, a
carbon and energy reporting platform that
links environmental integrity with fiduciary
duty. This platform allows residents,
investors, and governments alike to view the
information needed to continue to create
thriving economies that are sustainable.
As part of their scoring process, third-party
validation is needed to ensure that the data
being presented is valid.32
Global Covenant of Mayors —
Procedures being developed
Since 2015, Phoenix has also committed to
the Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate
and Energy, which is in the process of
developing procedures for data validation in
its Common Reporting Framework.33 Source: C40 Cities 29
38
Energy Access Plan
As part of Phoenix’s commitment to the Global Covenant of Mayors, the city needs to begin to formulate an Energy
Access Plan that provides energy that is secure, sustainable, and affordable in line with the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goal 7. Access to secure energy will be accomplished by reducing energy demand by increasing energy
efficiency and energy management, diversifying the energy mix to include renewable energy, and to diversify sources of
energy. Energy should be obtained from sustainable sources, with renewable energy generation being considered first.
Increasing the affordability of energy will depend on local government action along with action at the state and national
levels. The local government can influence affordability through local policies, energy management and use of incentives
to promote renewable sources of energy and energy efficiency measures.33
ENERGY INSECURITY WORKGROUP
Currently, Phoenix is participating in the Energy Insecurity Workgroup with the goal to develop a plan alongside the
Maricopa County Public Health Department, American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (AEEE), Arizona State
University and other local stakeholders.
Severely burdened means that more than 10% of household income goes to energy. Highly burdened means that more
than 6% of household income goes to energy. Among all households in Phoenix, 10% are severely burdened and 21%
are highly burdened.
34,35 Phoenix will develop an Energy Access Plan to address the needs of residents.
(Source Energy Insecurity Workgroup and AEEE34,35)
39
STATIONARY ENERGY
40
Goal SES1: Achieve net-zero GHG emissions for
municipal operations electricity use by 2030 through
renewable energy projects, energy efficiency upgrades,
and utility partnerships.
Goal SES2: Support energy-efficiency upgrades to
existing buildings throughout the city by developing
three new community-wide conservation and
renewable-energy programs including educational
programs and incentives to conserve energy by 2025.
Goal SES3: Promote development of community-wide
energy projects, including microgrids, that improve
the sustainability and resilience of the surrounding
community’s electricity grid.
Goal SES4: Design and construct all new buildings
within the city to Living Building Challenge, Net-Positive
Design, or equivalent design standards by 2050.
Goal SES5: Support policies and projects that that help
shape an electricity grid that is net-zero GHG emissions
by 2050.
2050
GOAL
All buildings will be powered with
net-zero GHG sources of energy. All
new buildings will be “net-positive” in
terms of energy and materials. At the
community scale, we will enhance 15
compact centers where the services
are provided locally. Residents will be
able to live, work and play, all within
walking or biking distance.
STATIONARY ENERGY
(SES) GOALS
WASTE AS A RESOURCE (WR) GOALS
41
by replacing your home’s
five most frequently used
light fixtures or bulbs
with ENERGY STAR®
models.37
streetlights converted to
LEDsaving the city
in annual energy costs.39
residents are estimated
to be eligible for the Low
Income Home Energy
Assistance Program
(LIHEAP)36
620,799
Source of Energy
 by Fuel Type (2019)38
100,000
$3.5 MILLION
 SAVE
UP TO
$75/YR
45%
Gas
Solar
Other
Renewables
5% 9%
19%
Nuclear
22%
Coal
42
According to the 2018 GHG Community Inventory, 51% of GHG emissions
in Phoenix come from the stationary energy sector. Electricity and
natural gas provide the energy that lights buildings, cools our homes and
businesses and powers industry. Currently, most of the electricity that
is used in Phoenix comes from the combustion of fossil fuels–natural
gas and coal. Generation of electricity from these fuels releases GHGs
that contribute to climate change. Maximizing energy efficiency and using
renewable sources of energy will reduce the community’s emissions. Solar
energy is the most abundant and least expensive form of renewable energy
in the Phoenix area and it holds the most promise for reducing
GHG emissions from the production of electricity.
Phoenix receives 30-40% more solar radiation than most other locations
in the United States, and this results in superior cost-efficiency for solar
energy projects in the Phoenix area. Google Project Sunroof estimates
rooftop solar potential of Phoenix to be over 9,300 MW throughout the city
as seen in the map that follows.40 Arizona has a renewable energy standard
and tariff (REST) that requires that regulated utilities provide at least 15%
of retail sales from renewable energy by 2025, with a requirement that
30% be generated from systems located on customer’s premises, including
residential and commercial rooftops. The Arizona Corporation Commission
recently adopted rules to require utilities to reduce carbon emissions by
50% by the end of 2032, 80% by the end of 2050, and 100% by the end
of 2070. The baseline is an average from years 2016-2018. According to
the Environment America Research & Policy Center and Frontier Group,
Phoenix is the city with the fourth-most solar photovoltaic (PV)
installed, and the eighth-most solar PV installed per capita.
41
Arizona has the second-most solar potential among U.S. states, and is
currently fourth in solar generation.42
BACKGROUND
43
Estimated rooftop solar potential (in yellow) of Phoenix, AZ from Google Project Sunroof40
Estimated Rooftop Solar Potential
44
Local Government Leading the Way
The city of Phoenix hosts solar projects from only a few panels to those of megawatt scale. These include solar
installations on city property, including rooftops, carports, and ground-mounted arrays, some of which serve
facilities where they are installed. In collaboration with Arizona Public Service (APS) and Salt River Project (SRP),
large-scale solar energy projects are in progress to produce carbon-free energy for the local power grids. Since
these larger projects require a large amount of space, future plans to site solar energy projects will include large
city properties like landfills, similar to the Solar Partnership with APS at SR-85. APS has also committed to providing
carbon-free electricity by 205012, while SRP has committed to providing carbon-free generation by 2060.13
Solar Energy Generation System at Rental Car Center at
Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport
45
As technologies become more accessible, such as light emitting diodes (LED) to replace fluorescent or incandescent
lighting, they are being installed and provide cost savings over the life of the equipment. The city replaced all of its
about 100,000 existing streetlight fixtures with energy-efficient, LED fixtures. The new fixtures feature a 2,700-kelvin LED,
the city’s new color standard for streetlights. LED streetlights also offer maintenance savings and come with a
10-year warranty.39
KEY ACHIEVEMENT
46
Install solar energy generation systems on city
housing neighborhoods.
City housing developments will include solar power generation as part
of the APS Solar Communities Program. Solar installations will promote
equity in the distribution of resources to overburdened communities, and
will demonstrate our commitment to sustainability investments in all of
our communities.
CITY LEAD // Housing
PARTNERSHIPS // APS
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Replace lighting in municipal operations with light emitting
diodes (LEDs) to reduce electricity consumption.
Replacing incandescent and fluorescent lighting in municipal operations
with LEDs results in lower electricity consumption and longer lifetime
of the device.
CITY LEAD // Public Works, Convention Center, Police, Information
Technology Services, Water Services, Aviation
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
GOAL 1 SES1.1
Achieve net-zero GHG
emissions for municipal
operations electricity use
by 2030 through renewable
energy projects, energy
efficiency upgrades, and
utility partnerships.
TARGET 1
100%
BASELINE
3%
Quickstart Actions
SES1.2 Quickstart Actions
47
The Choice Neighborhoods Edison-Eastlake
Community redevelopment will include Gold LEED for
Neighborhood Development (LEED ND) certification and
architectural guidelines that create “Enterprise Green
Communities” (a green building certification program
administered through enterprisecommunity.org). The
community-driven redevelopment effort will provide
new mixed-income, energy-efficient housing that will
become a showcase for sustainable development.
The Aeroterra Community is a HOPE VI redevelopment
project that replaced obsolete public housing units
with mixed-income energy efficient, Enterprise Green
Communities certified buildings. The project also
included carports with solar panels.
 In addition to the efforts in the Choice Neighborhoods
Edison-Eastlake Community, the Housing Department
also partnered with the APS Solar Communities
Program and new carports and solar panels have been
installed at Monroe Gardens, Fillmore Gardens, Marcos
de Niza Apartments, Summit Apartments, Sunnyslope
Manor, and Washington Manor Apartments.
Choice Neighborhoods
Energy-Efficient Housing–
Housing Department
Installed solar panels at Aeroterra (top) and Edison-Eastlake LEED ND project site map (bottom).
48
Double the solar energy generation systems installed
on city-owned infrastructure adding 30 MW of new solar
capacity by 2030.
The cost of solar photovoltaic systems has dropped 80% from 2010 costs.
In most cases, solar rooftop, ground mount and carport arrays now
provide electricity at cost parity with utility company power. The city
energy team has developed over 40 behind-the-meter solar projects on
city properties, ranging from 3 kW to 5 MW.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // All Departments, renewable energy developers,
and utilities
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
Replace heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)
equipment units to increase energy efficiency and phase
out R-22 refrigerant.
The Montreal Protocol requires the U.S. to reduce its consumption
of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) by 99.5% necessitating that
equipment utilizing refrigerants be phased out. Approximately 300 of
900 HVAC units using this R-22 refrigerant have been replaced.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
SES1.3
SES1.4
Ongoing Actions
Ongoing Actions
49
Use Energy Management Plans to identify opportunities
to reduce energy use and cost at city-owned facilities.
An energy management program (EMP) is developed for each city
building or process to support conservation and energy efficiency.
CITY LEAD // All Departments
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Contract with Partners to secure 250 MW of utility-scale
renewable energy projects, to offset or displace 100% of utilityprovided electricity consumed in city operations by 2030.
After lowering city operations energy use through energy conservation
and efficiency programs, and building on-site solar projects to the extent
practical, offset the remaining electricity used in city operations through
utility-scale renewable energy projects. These may be developed by a
range of procurement tools that assure financial responsibility to our
taxpayers, minimal financial and business risks to city budgets and
verifiable additionality of carbon reduction to city operations.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // APS, SRP, Renewable Energy Providers
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
SES1.5
SES1.6
Ongoing Actions
Ongoing Actions
50
Install solar energy generation systems at Aviation
Department properties, including Phoenix Sky Harbor
International Airport.
Six MW of solar energy currently power the Phoenix’s Sky Harbor
Rental Car Center, several parking garages for the flying public, and
Aviation Headquarters at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport.
Additional arrays are planned for Terminal 4 and short-term
parking facilities, as well as for Aviation properties at remote sites.
CITY LEAD // Aviation
PARTNERSHIPS // APS
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
Install solar energy generation systems at landfills.
Landfills are potential candidates for placing large solar energy
generation systems. The SR-85 landfill has an existing 10 MW
solar field operated by Arizona Public Services (APS) and other
portions of the 2,650-acre landfill site are amenable to additional
solar projects.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS // APS
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
SES1.7
SES1.8
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
51
Install solar energy generation systems at water and
wastewater treatment plants.
In 2013, a 7.5 MW solar array was constructed at the Lake Pleasant
Water Treatment Plant (the renewable energy credits were sold). Water
treatment consumes very large quantities of electricity. The city’s other
four water treatment plants and two wastewater treatment plants have
significant potential to host new solar.
CITY LEAD // Water Services
PARTNERSHIPS // SunPower Corp.
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
SES1.9 Pending Actions
Lake Pleasant WTP that produces 7.5 MW of solar power in partnership with
SunPower Corp. The installation is on 30 acres and has 22,936 solar panels
saving $4.2 million in cost savings over the 20-year life of the system. 43
52
Emerging Technologies Program research new and innovative ways
to save energy for municipal operations.
Investigate new and innovative ways that save energy by evaluating
technologies that reduce cooling loads in a facility.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS // Office of Sustainability
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
SES1.10 Pending Actions
As part of Action SES1.4,
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), like R-22,
are chemicals used as refrigerants in heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning systems that
have a higher potential to absorb heat than
carbon dioxide and need to be replaced as
part of the Montreal Protocol.44, 45
HCFCs and R-22
Refrigerant
53
Reduce energy consumption at city facilities
by 30% by 2030 (2012 baseline).
Electricity consumed by municipal operations of the City of Phoenix
totaled about 581,000,000 kWh in 2020, or about 5% of all electricity
used in the city limits. Services that consume that energy include
emergency response; neighborhood services, housing, elderly
and other community services; water treatment and delivery, and
wastewater treatment; aviation services at three airports; monitoring
and environmental services; convention and cultural facilities; and
support services. Energy consumption will be reduced by through
increased building and process efficiencies.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // All Departments
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
SES1.11 Pending Actions
54
Phoenix Convention Center
Phoenix Convention Center (PCC) staff began evaluating potential
areas for energy reduction improvements in 2015. Partnering
with APS to capture the benefit of its Rebate Program, PCC has
completed seventeen projects of which thirteen were eligible for
rebates. Over the past 5 years, electrical staff and contractors have
replaced or upgraded lamps and lighting equipment, saving approximately $700,000, reducing usage by 1.84M kWh,
and earning rebates totaling $170,000. Based upon the U.S. Energy Information Administration’s annual average for
residential electricity usage, the PCC reduced its electricity usage equivalent to that of 170 homes. From stairwells,
garages, meeting rooms and food court area over 7,725 lightbulbs and lighting fixtures have been installed, all while
planning, ordering materials and completing projects around event activity, other priority facility requests, routine
and preventative maintenance tasks. Based upon a recently completed energy audit, the Phoenix Convention Center
will continue to implement energy reduction materials and systems over the next 2-5 years.
Aviation Department
The Aviation Department reduced energy use by 17.28% between 2009 and 2018 to meet the Better Building
Challenge adopted by the city of Phoenix. (Note: PHX Sky Train® is not included, as it was not in service in 2009).
The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) Level II Energy Audits
completed in 2015 were the basis of the Strategic Energy Management Plan and additional Investment Grade Energy
Audits have been done. The update to the Aviation Department Design and Construction Services - Design Standards
has been completed and is in the process of being implemented. The Standards will focus on procuring more energy
efficient equipment during new construction. Recent projects include: New HVAC control system with optimization at
44th St. Sky Train Station® Chiller Plant; Variable Frequency Drive Installation for Condenser Pumps at the Rental Car
Center. Conversion to LED: North Runway and high-speed turn-offs, Terminal 4 Departure /Arrival street lighting and
High-Profile Parking Lot light, at East Economy Garages A & B, and the Terminal 4 Garage.
Local Government
Energy Efficiency
Examples
55
Provide services and products to enhance and promote
the provision of safe, efficient, sustainable and affordable
residences and neighborhoods.
Administer programs citywide that provide low- and moderateincome Phoenix residents access to housing rehabilitation services for
homeowners and renters, which address emergency health and safety
concerns, stabilize critical systems, remediate lead hazards, and
improve energy efficiency; and preserve naturally occurring affordable
rental housing.
CITY LEAD // Neighborhood Services
PARTNERSHIPS // Non-profits, Small businesses, Community Partners
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Attract sustainable and inclusive businesses by developing
entrepreneurship and leadership programs to achieve
2050 goals.
Create, launch and lead a new business attraction strategy designed
to recruit both national and international low and post-carbon companies
to the city of Phoenix. Develop an inclusive entrepreneurship program
that addresses the systemic barriers to wealth generation and small
business formation, serves communities most impacted by the effects of
climate change and supports and promotes the growth of entrepreneurs
and innovators developing business models around climate action.
CITY LEAD // Community and Economic Development
PARTNERSHIPS // ASU, Workforce Board, MCCC
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
SES2.1
SES2.2
GOAL 2
TARGET 2
3
BASELINE
0
Ongoing Actions
Pending Actions
Support energy-efficiency
upgrades to existing buildings
throughout the city by developing
three new community-wide
conservation and renewableenergy programs including
educational programs and
incentives to conserve
energy by 2025.
56
Mayor Kate Gallego has committed to a decade of action focused on creating good quality jobs; tackling inequality; raising
international climate ambition and calling on other cities to join them. Mayors and unions are providing accessible good
quality jobs, addressing energy poverty, improving air quality, and investing in resilient infrastructure.
The Call to Action includes pledging to the following:
New Jobs: Ensure that this climate action plan delivers good quality jobs.
New Skills: Work with businesses, schools, and residents to provide the education and training necessary for the future.
Social Equity: Where city powers exist, provide social protection and affordable access to essential public services,
especially to overburdened communities.
Tackling Inequality: Act to tackle long-standing inequalities and work to limit the impact on communities most
vulnerable to climate change.
New Partnerships: Form new partnerships and associations at all levels of business and government to ensure
a just transition.
New Investment: Secure investments necessary to deliver a green and just recovery. 46
Cities and Unions Call to Action:
A Climate Decade for Good Quality Jobs
Strongly advocate for distributed solar energy systems
(rooftop and carport solar) and for a cleaner electric grid,
with more utility-scale solar arrays.
As a C40 City, Phoenix is a recognized leader in local and state efforts
to advocate for a cleaner grid and increased access to solar. With
direction from the Mayor and City Council, the city will work towards
increased sustainable policies and actions alongside utilities, financial
institutions, and policymakers at the local to national levels.
CITY LEAD // Office of Government Relations, Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
SES2.3 Pending Actions
57
Solar Energy and Phoenix
The Arizona Corporation Commission (ACC), an elected commission of five members, manages state utility policies,
including Arizona Renewable Energy Standard and Tariff (AZ REST). The AZ REST, passed in 2006, requires regulated
utilities to provide at least 15% of retail sales from renewable energy by 2025. All annual reporting since 2012 has
required at least 30% of the utilities’ requirement under the standard come from distributed energy sources,
or behind the meter systems that are located on the customer’s premises. The 30% “carveout” for distributed
generation is a strong incentive for utilities to encourage residential and small commercial rooftop solar energy
generation, and APS has now over 50,000 behind-the-meter solar generators tied to its grid.
Compared to neighboring states, Arizona’s current REST is the least ambitious. (New Mexico: 40% by 2025, 80% by
2040; California: 44% by 2024, 52% by 2027, 60% by 2030; Nevada: 50% by 2030; Colorado: 30% by 2020; Arizona:
15% by 2025, 80% by 2050, 100% by 2070).
Environment America Research and Policy Center publishes an annual report, 2020 Shining Cities, which reviews
and ranks American cities by their level of adoption of solar energy production within their city limits. Total solar
capacity, per capita capacity, and total solar production are reported, along with brief summaries that explain why,
for example, Phoenix, Los Angeles, and San Diego host significantly more solar energy than other cities.
With 272.4 MW of installed solar in the city limits, and 164 watts per person, Phoenix ranks 4th nationally by
total capacity installed, and 8th per capita. The relative strength among metropolitan areas of solar industries
depends on the relative strength of the solar resource, state renewable energy policies, and the policies of electrical
utilities about climate and pollution issues. While the first of these factors suggests that Phoenix (and Las Vegas)
would lead the nation in solar adoption, state and utility policies pull Los Angeles and San Diego into 1st and 2nd
place rankings in that report. Shining Cities recommends that cities:
• Establish goals for solar energy adoption and programs
to meet those goals.
• Implement solar access ordinances to protect residents’
right to generate solar energy on their own property.
• Make permitting, zoning and inspection processes easy,
quick and affordable.
• Expand access to solar energy to apartment dwellers,
low-income residents, small businesses and nonprofits
through community solar projects and third-party
financing options, such as power purchase agreements.
• Implement policies that support energy storage, electric
vehicle smart charging and microgrids.
• Require new homes and buildings to be built with solar
panels, or at least be constructed to be “solar-ready,” and
• Support and push for strong state-level solar policies.
 In June 2021, City
Council voted to update
regulations, including
the fire code and fee
structure, to make it
easier and more cost
effective for residents
to have solar panels
installed. Permits are
expected to double as a
result of this change.
58
Affordable Housing Programs
Neighborhood Services Department’s community development programs’ goal is to create homeownership
opportunities for Phoenix’s low- and moderate-income residents. The 2021 closeout of the South Phoenix Village
Single-Family Infill Redevelopment project completed construction of 126 new build single-family homes is a great
example of the city’s commitment. The homes were built with the highest expectation of energy efficiency and
sustainability results in mind; and increase the number of affordable housing options throughout the city.
The Housing Rehabilitation program, also administered by the Neighborhood Services Department, has
completed repair services to over 1,100 residential structures, most in dire life-threatening situations, to eliminate
environmental, health, and safety hazards and provide healthy living environments. Housing repair services address
emergency and critical system repairs (e.g. plumbing, electrical, and roofing). Other housing rehabilitation program
opportunities exist under the Lead Safe Phoenix and Weatherization Assistance programs. Lead Safe Phoenix
focuses on the reduction of lead hazards, to ensure safe areas for children under 6 years of age to grow and develop
in healthy and safe households. The Low-Income Weatherization Assistance Program concentrates on decreasing
energy consumption and improving indoor air quality for residences within the 200% Federal Poverty Level.
New Roof New Insulation New EnergyStar Appliances
A South Phoenix home with electricity bills over $400/month and lead hazards underwent
renovation through NSD Weatherization, Lead Hazard Control and HOME Rehab receiving
LED lighting, new roof, all new EnergyStar appliances, and was completely replumbed.
59
Install microgrids in city-owned facilities that serve the city’s
redundancy needs and utilities long-term energy goals.
During the 23rd Ave Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) Power
Redundancy study, Phoenix partnered with APS to install a microgrid that
would serve both the city’s power redundancy needs and APS’s longterm goals. Additional power redundancy studies will be conducted at
different facilities. Microgrids will be installed at those facilities identified
to show a benefit to the power redundancy needs at those locations.
CITY LEAD // Water Services
PARTNERSHIPS // APS
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
GOAL 3
TARGET 2
To be determined
BASELINE
1
Promote development of
community-wide energy
projects, including microgrids,
that improve the sustainability
and resilience of the
surrounding community’s
electricity grid.
SES3.1 Pending Actions
60
As part of Goal SES3, microgrids are “mini electricity grids” that can be powered independently from the utilities by
on-site generators, renewable energy sources, and energy storage devices to maintain power in highly sensitive areas,
like wastewater treatment plants, or in residential neighborhoods.47
23rd Ave WWTP Power Redundancy Study
A microgrid was installed at the 23rd Ave WWTP that would benefit the city’s critical infrastructure power redundancy
needs and APS’s long term goals. A microgrid is a local energy grid that can disconnect from the traditional grid and
function autonomously without disrupting operations. In times of crisis, this capability is important to the continued
operation of water and wastewater treatment plants. During these times, the microgrid can use its own local energy
generation from solar energy generation systems, emergency generators or an on-site battery system. Once the crisis
is resolved, the microgrid can then be connected to the traditional grid. This is also useful if energy generation in the
surrounding community is disrupted and can provide resiliency and stability to the grid. As part of the installation, Tier
2 generators were replaced with more stringently regulated Tier 4 generators which will significantly reduce emissions.
Microgrids
Industrial and residential microgrid examples.48
61
Update zoning and other codes and streamline permitting
processes for green/sustainable construction and renewable
energy (solar) projects to reduce barriers for consumers.
Updating zoning and other planning and development codes to promote
green/sustainable construction projects to match internationally
recognized sustainability codes. Currently, compliance with the 2012
International Green Construction Code is voluntary. A study of options
for ordinances for electric vehicle charging stations and associated
infrastructure is being conducted. The city continues to explore
photovoltaic solar design software solutions that would ensure code
compliance, eliminate the need for plan review and reduce solar permit
processing time.
CITY LEAD // Planning and Development
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Develop embodied carbon calculators applicable to the
Phoenix climate and building materials used within the region.
Work with providers of embodied carbon calculators to develop
calculators applicable to our climate zone and test those tools on
a sample of the building stock. These calculators can then be used
to determine which methods of construction can be used to lower
GHG impact.
CITY LEAD // Planning and Development
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
GOAL 4
TARGET 4
All new buildings
in 2050
BASELINE
1
Design and construct all new
buildings within the city to
Living Building Challenge,
Net-Positive Design, or
equivalent design
standards by 2050.
SES4.1 Pending Actions
SES4.2 Pending Actions
62
Design and construct all city of Phoenix municipal operations
facilities to Living Building Challenge, Net Positive Design, or
equivalent design standards by 2050.
The Living Building Challenge is an international sustainable building
certification program that promotes the most advanced standard of
sustainability in the built environment. On July 6, 2018, the Phoenix
City Council adopted the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code
(2018 IECC), which is a model code that establishes minimum design and
construction requirements for energy efficiency.
CITY LEAD // Planning and Development
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
SES4.3 Pending Actions
Develop incentives and standards to foster private sector
developments that meet or exceed the Living Building Challenge,
Net Positive Design, or equivalent design standards by 2050.
New incentives to foster private sector developments that meet or exceed
the Living Building Challenge, Net Positive Design, or equivalent design
standards, are necessary to spur innovation, create showcase projects, and
build capacity in the industry. Planning and Development will work with
industry to accelerate high-performance building in the region. Phoenix is
currently in the plan review stage for construction of the city’s first net-zero
building in collaboration with the Sonoran Studio.
CITY LEAD // Planning and Development
PARTNERSHIPS // All Departments
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
SES4.4
SES4.4 Pending Actions
63
As part of Goal SES4, all new buildings
will be designed and constructed to
meet the Living Building Challenge, Net
Positive Design, or equivalent by 2050.
This means that these buildings will be
self-sustaining in energy and water use and
over the life of the building will be netpositive contributors to the surrounding
community.
Sonoran Studio Building
The Sonoran Studio Building will be
Arizona’s first Certified Living Building.
It is designed by Architectural Resource
Team and will be the future home of their
architectural offices. This building will be
on the leading edge of regenerative design.
This is a project that will generate all of its
own energy with renewable resources. It
will capture and treat its water on-site, meeting the important implementation targets outlined in Phoenix’s climate
action goals. The Building shall be Net Zero energy and incorporate non-toxic materials in its construction. Building
design features include solar photovoltaic panels, Zero Mass Water hydrological panels, composting toilets, a
rainwater harvesting system and grey water recycling system.
The intent of the design is to meet all water demands within the carrying capacity of the site and mimic natural
hydrological conditions, using appropriately sized and climate-specific water management systems that treat,
infiltrate or reuse all water resources on site. Project water use and release must work in harmony with the natural
water flows of the site and its surroundings. One hundred percent of the project’s water needs must be supplied by
captured precipitation or other natural closed loop water systems, and/ or by recycling used project water, and must
be purified as needed without the use of chemicals.
Living Building Challenge
Sonoran Studio49
64
Increase renewable and clean energy resources.
APS and SRP are the utilities that serve Phoenix and the surrounding
areas. By 2030, APS set a goal to achieve a resource mix that is 65% clean
energy, with 45% coming from renewable energy by 2030. APS has also
announced a goal to deliver 100% clean, carbon-free electricity by 2050.
SRP set a goal to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide emissions emitted
per megawatt-hour by 62% from 2005 levels by 2035 and by 90% by 2050.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // APS, SRP
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
Leverage the city’s purchasing power to procure 100%
renewable electricity for municipal operations.
Municipal operations are responsible for 3.8% of Phoenix’s total GHG
emissions from electricity use based on the 2018 GHG emissions
inventory. To demonstrate leadership, the city has committed to procure
100% renewable electricity for municipal operations by 2030. In 2020,
Phoenix began receiving electricity from SRP’s 10.7 MW Saint Solar power
plant in Coolidge, Arizona.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // APS, SRP
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
SES5.1
SES5.2
GOAL 5
TARGET 5
By 2050, electricity
will come from
an electricity grid
that is net-zero.
BASELINE
33%
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
Support policies and projects
that that help shape an
electricity grid that is net-zero
GHG emissions by 2050.
65
TRANSPORTATION
66
Goal TS1: Implement the city’s Complete Streets
Policy and Active Transportation program to
encourage multiple modes of transportation,
particularly within and connecting to Transit
Oriented Development Districts, Village Cores
and Centers.
Goal TS2: Increase the community-wide use of
low carbon fuels (i.e., fuels other than gasoline
and diesel).
Goal TS3: Rapidly accelerate electric vehicle (EV)
adoption in the community and expand publicly
accessible EV charging infrastructure throughout the
city to result in 50% of all vehicle sales being electric
vehicles by 2030.
Goal TS4: Reduce the percentage of single occupant
vehicle trips taken to 60% of all trips, through land
use and transportation investments that encourage
walkable and transit oriented communities while
maintaining a thriving economy.
2050
GOAL
All forms of transportation will be
fueled with net-zero GHG sources of
energy. Make walking, cycling, and
transit commonly used, enjoyed,
and accessible for every Phoenix
neighborhood, including our disabled
community. This goal will result in 90%
of the population living within one-half
mile of transit, and projects 40% of the
population will choose to commute by
walking, biking, transit or car share.
TRANSPORTATION
SECTOR (TS)
GOALS
WASTE AS A RESOURCE (WR) GOALS
67
funding for
of travel
is by passenger
automobile.53
Trips per day per person.20
Level 2 electric vehicle
charging stations in
Phoenix metro area.54
of travel by bus in 2019.53
miles driven per year.50
(or 27,000 trips to the
moon and back!)
BILLION
Transportation Sector
GHG Emissions by Fuel Type
 (2018)51
$31.5 BILLION52
85%
1.7%
12.9 3.78
598
Other
76%
Gasoline
11%
Diesel
10%
Jet Fuel
3%
68
A well-connected city drives innovation. Cities must provide a
transportation system that gets residents to where they want
to go without needing to jump into a car alone or to travel long
distances to get to their destination. Currently, GHG emissions
from transportation are increasing as the population grows and
the city is built out to accommodate this growth. According to
the 2018 GHG community inventory, forty-six percent of all GHG
emissions in Phoenix are from transportation, with the majority
being from use of gasoline fuel in passenger vehicles. Eighty-four
percent of travel likely will continue to be done by passenger vehicle
in 2030.29 To become a net-zero GHG-emissions city, significant
reductions need to be made in this sector through planning and
development of communities and transportation infrastructure
that allows for modes of travel other than the single occupancy,
fossil-fueled vehicle. This can be achieved by designing Complete
Streets to accommodate safe and accessible multimodal travel,
like walking and bicycling. The path to decreasing GHG emissions
also includes an increase in consumption of non-conventional fuels
or alternative fuels and eventual transition to vehicles powered
by electricity or other carbon-free fuel. In addition, efforts must
be taken to align Land Use and Transportation infrastructure
investments to make walking, biking, and transit more convenient,
comfortable, and efficient; particularly within and connecting to
Transit Oriented Development Districts, Village Cores, and Centers.
By pursuing these goals, Phoenix can reduce its GHG emissions
from transportation by 2050.
BACKGROUND
69
T2050 High Capacity Transit Progress through June 30, 2020.
70
Local Government Leading the Way
In 2008, the largest light rail construction project in the nation’s history was completed in Phoenix. This major
achievement was the result of a partnership between local and federal agencies, strong civic leadership, and
visionary urban planning that began decades earlier. The infrastructure, however, was designed to not just add high
quality transportation options, but to lay a foundation for “reinventing” the communities surrounding it and creating
new urban living choices in a city planned almost entirely for the automobile. In 2011, the city was awarded a $2.9
million Sustainable Communities Challenge Grant from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD). Thus, a collaborative partnership and initiative between the city, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, and numerous other organizations was born. This partnership came to be known as “ReinventPHX”
and aimed to create a new urban development model in Phoenix to achieve Walkable Communities. “ReinventPHX”
resulted in the creation and adoption of a Transit Oriented Development (TOD) Strategic Policy Framework in
2013 followed by five District Policy Plans in 2015 to illustrate the community vision and align it with development
strategies and actions for the communities situated along the first phase of the light rail. In 2016, the Northwest
Extension Phase I was completed and shortly after, the city began a 2-3 year process working with that community
to develop a sixth TOD Policy Plan, titled 19North, using the ReinventPHX TOD Strategic Policy Framework as a guide
and was recently adopted on April 7, 2021.
In 2016 the city was awarded a $2 million Transit Oriented Development Planning grant from the Federal Transit
Administration (FTA) to engage the community and support local businesses along the South Central Avenue
planned light rail extension. The product of this grant exercise will be a seventh TOD Policy plan, inspired by the
hearts and voices of the community.
In 2019, and again in 2020, the city was awarded two subsequent Transit Oriented Development Planning Grants
from the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) for the proposed Capitol/I-10 West and Northwest Phase II Light Rail
extensions to engage those communities in a similar exercise to develop two additional TOD Policy Plans for those
communities.
Since its adoption in 2013, the city TOD Strategic Policy Framework has been used successfully to provide a holistic
and multidisciplinary engagement, visioning, and implementation plan framework for several diverse transit
oriented communities in the city. This framework has evolved over the years to respond to various community
needs yet maintains its foundational structure inclusive of five (5) interrelated and interdependent factors (Equity,
Diversity, Authenticity, Resiliency, and Prosperity) to permeate planning and decision making processes to help
ensure sustainability.
71
The city of Phoenix has many initiatives and plans that are addressing the transportation needs of its residents.
Plans include the Comprehensive Bicycle Master Plan, the Key Corridor Master Plan, and the Active Transportation
Plan. Goals of these plans include increasing bi-directional bike lanes from 1,065 miles to 1,995 miles by 2050.
Additional work is being done to make the canals multi-use and by 2050, 90% of the canals will feature paved paths
and have connections with crossings at major streets. Part of that work being done in partnership with SRP has
resulted in the Grand Canalscape, a safe and continuous commuter route for bicycle and pedestrian traffic from the
city of Tempe to Interstate 10.
Most residents in Phoenix prefer to use passenger vehicles for travel with 84% of travel being projected to be
completed by passenger automobile in 2030, so there is increased focus on the rollout and development of electric
vehicles and electric vehicle charging infrastructure. GHG emissions from travel by airplane must also be considered.
The Aviation Department (AVN) is implementing an environmental management information system in 2021 and
this system will include tools to actively track and notify status of greenhouse gas emissions. AVN is also including an
environmental overview and sustainability strategy as a step in the Comprehensive Asset Management Plan (CAMP)
implementation plan. Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport has achieved GHG emissions reduction every year
since 2014, primarily through energy conservation projects. In 2020, the airport achieved a Level 3 Certification
in the Airport Carbon Accreditation Program. To continue to reduce GHG emissions, the manufacturers of aircraft
(Boeing, Airbus, etc.) and their airline customers have been investigating new, more sustainable fuels for commercial
scale use. In conversations with our industry partners, AVN is ready to facilitate the adoption of these new fuels once
available. Thanks to all these considerations, Phoenix residents will be available to have a variety of transportation
options that suit their needs.
72
T2050
Transportation 2050 (T2050) is a 35-year initiative to improve streets and transit service, including bus service
and light-rail construction, throughout the city. The approval of Proposition 104 by voters in 2015 resulted in a
0.7% sales tax that replaced a 0.4% sales tax and will provide roughly half of the funding. This is supplemented
with federal and county funds, passenger fares and other sources for a total of $31.5 billion. Approximately 86% of
funds are dedicated to public transit and approximately 14% to streets. Through T2050, Phoenix’s arterial-street
maintenance cycle will be cut nearly in half, from 65 years to 33 years. T2050 will provide an estimated $2.3 billion
for major street-improvement projects, such as new bridges and new roads, to help connect and complete the
city’s roadway network. Transit improvements entail tripling the number of light rail miles in Phoenix by adding
42 miles of high-capacity corridors to the Valley’s current 20-mile light rail line. The bus service network is being
expanded to include 75 miles of bus rapid transit and corridors are being evaluated. Engaging with the public is
vital to understanding residents’ transportation needs. Staff members host open houses and public meetings and
attend community events to provide information and gather input.
Public input is sought on a variety of topics such as planning bus routes and extensions, future station locations
for light rail, potential bus rapid transit corridors, building and improving roads, and creating and improving
bike lanes. Beginning in March 2020, in-person public outreach meetings were temporarily suspended, and staff
members were directed not to attend community meetings due to the pandemic; however, many outreach events
occurred prior to this time. Staff members also adapted to a new way of conducting business by hosting virtual
public meetings accessible by phone or computer — complete with presentations, a variety of speakers and public
question-and-answer segments.
The Citizens Transportation Commission (CTC) was established in 2015 by the Mayor and Phoenix City Council
for the T2050 program. Fifteen commissioners are appointed by the City Council to address street and transit
needs, provide oversight on the expenditure of funds and make recommendations on plan elements. The Phoenix
City Council’s Transportation, Infrastructure and Innovation subcommittee provides guidance, approvals and
recommendations on policies related to infrastructure, transportation, transit, streets, aviation/airport, water,
technology, smart cities, innovation and sustainability. Additional oversight is provided through the City Council,
and opportunities for public input occur at these meetings as well. For more information, visit phoenix.gov/T2050/
KEY ACHIEVEMENT
“$1 million in American Rescue Plan Act funds used to purchase transit
passes for those experiencing financial or other difficulties.”
73
Increase bike lane mileage in the city of Phoenix and ensure
the bicycle network is connected and comfortable for riders
of all ages and abilities.
Bicycling promotes a healthy lifestyle and has significantly lower
emissions and requires much less infrastructure than a motor vehicle.
Phoenix City Council adopted the Comprehensive Bicycle Master Plan
in November 2014. This plan will help develop a comprehensive bicycle
network that is fully connected with the Phoenix community and
other transportation networks. There are 1,065 miles of bi-directional
bike lanes with a goal of 1,995 miles by 2050. In addition to the
Comprehensive Bicycle Master Plan, the T2050 Mobility Improvements
subprogram was established to improve neighborhood mobility through
the construction of new sidewalks and multi-modal connectivity
through the provision of new bicycle facilities.
CITY LEAD // Street Transportation
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
Create a network of multi-use paths along the existing
canal network in Phoenix.
The canal network is used to transport water throughout Phoenix and
provides an opportunity to incorporate alternative mobility improvements
along its banks. In 2020, Phoenix opened the initial 12 miles of shared use
path along the Grand Canal in Central Phoenix from Interstate 17 to the city
of Tempe. This shared use path provides safe and convenient walking and
biking access between neighborhoods, transit corridors, local employment,
shopping, education and recreation centers. The next segment began design
in late 2020 with implementation by late 2023. 45% of canals have paved
paths. By 2050, 90% of canals will have paved and connected paths, with
crossings at major streets or barriers.
CITY LEAD // Street Transportation
PARTNERSHIPS // ADOT, MAG, SRP
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
TS1.1
TS1.2
GOAL 1
Implement the city’s Complete
Streets Policy and Active
Transportation program to
encourage multiple modes of
transportation, particularly
within and connecting to
Transit Oriented Development
Districts, Village Cores
and Centers .
TARGET 1
60% Single
Occupancy
Vehicle Travel
BASELINE
85%
Ongoing Actions
Pending Actions
74
For much of its recent history, the portion of lateral
14.4 stretching south along the unpaved 31st Avenue
alignment from Missouri Avenue to Camelback Road
exemplified the unmet public potential of the Valley’s
historic canal corridors. Hemmed in by graffiti-marred
block walls, the open ditch and dirt trail answered the
utilitarian call of providing maintenance access to the
lateral, nothing more. The Little Canyon Trail Public Art
Project changed that, transforming the unsightly ½-mile
corridor into a model for how even the smallest canal
segments can become beautiful public spaces and safe
multi-modal routes. Designed by artist Laurie Lundquist
and landscape architect The Sherman Group through a
collaboration with the Office of Arts and Culture Public
Art Program, Street Transportation Department and
Parks Department , the enhanced trail closed an existing
gap in the Phoenix’s on-street bicycle trail network and
created new canal-side destinations for the surrounding
west Phoenix community. New seating areas, fencing,
entry portals, durable path and shade trees turned
the desolate, fragmented corridor into a source of
beauty and community pride. The corridor’s formerly
exposed terrain now boasts nearly 100 shade trees, a
10-foot-wide path with a sinuous pavement pattern,
high-efficiency pedestrian-level LED lighting, ADA
ramps, a fence that traces a wavy line – like the flow of
water – through the corridor, a landscaped roundabout
the Colter Street cul-de-sac, and round, steel entry
Little Canyon Trail
31st Avenue Between
Camelback Road and
Missouri Avenue
portals embellished with cotton-blossom patterns, in
recognition of the farms that once defined the area.
These enhancements balance the corridor’s need to
assure ongoing maintenance of the irrigation lateral
with providing safe passage for bicyclists connecting
to the on-street bicycle trails south of Camelback
Road and north of Missouri Avenue. They also expand
the trail’s function to provide shaded seating and
gathering spots for people wanting to sit and view
the canal. This expansion of public purpose both
acknowledges the history of farming that the canal
made possible, and the modern urban desire to make
more of the vital canal corridors that traverse our
Valley communities.55
75
In 2020, the city of Phoenix opened the initial 12 miles of shared use
path along the Grand Canal in Central Phoenix from Interstate 17 to the
city of Tempe. With limited resources and a growing city that requires
alternative mobility improvements for a vital transportation network,
the city of Phoenix Street Transportation Department partnered with the
Salt River Project (SRP) to create a safe and continuous commuter route
for bicycle and pedestrian traffic along the Grand Canal bank from the
city of Tempe to Interstate 10. The overall goal of the Grand Canalscape
is two-fold. The primary intent was to develop a continuous low-stress
active transportation route for bicycle and pedestrian traffic along the
Grand Canal bank. This shared use path provides safe and convenient
walking and biking access between neighborhoods, transit corridors,
local employment, shopping, education and recreation centers. The
route also includes safe crossing facilities at arterial and collector street/
trail intersections. The secondary intent of this project is to reintegrate
the canals into the surrounding communities by incorporating public
art, landscaping in areas of opportunity, and neighborhood access
points to the path which provide better visibility, access, and ultimately
appreciation of the extensive canal system in the Phoenix area. These
projects will provide a safe route for bicycle and pedestrian traffic away
from arterial streets and integrate the canals into the surrounding
communities through improved access, public art and landscaping –
with the goal of increasing usage and appreciation of one of our unique
assets, the canal system in the Phoenix area. The designs, lessons
learned, and experience gathered during this project provide a blueprint
for further development of the Grand Canal along with other canals in
the system such as the Western and Highline canals. The next segments
will be implemented by late 2023.56
Grand Canalscape
Develop a series of corridors with a strong emphasis
on active transportation and connections to high-capacity
transit corridors.
Two city-wide initiatives, the Key Corridor Master Plan (KCMP) and Active
Transportation Plan, currently underway will help develop a more robust
bicycle and pedestrian network throughout the 15 villages in Phoenix.
CITY LEAD // Street Transportation
PARTNERSHIPS // MAG
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
TS1.3 Pending Actions
76
Grand Canalscape Map
77
Support the development of communities that prioritize
walking, biking, and using transit as part of the city’s ongoing
Transit Oriented Development efforts.
Transit Oriented Development (TOD) is broadly defined as compact,
pedestrian-scaled, mixed use development strategically located within
a short walk of high capacity transit. TOD provides opportunities for
residential, business, and recreation spaces within walking distance
of public transit such as the light rail line. This close proximity reduces
commute times and the loss of productivity associated with traffic
congestion. The intent of TOD is to make walking, bicycling and using
transit convenient, safe and enjoyable for daily life. The total acreage
of expanded infill development within TOD areas is 403 acres. 707
affordable housing units have been developed within the TOD areas.
Over seven miles of bike lanes have been added to TOD areas. This
process establishes a new, transit-oriented model for urban planning
and development along the city’s light rail system.
CITY LEAD // Planning and Development
PARTNERSHIPS // All Departments
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
TS1.4 Pending Actions
78
Passage is a collaborative, multi-faceted work of public art,
by the Office of Arts and Culture and Street Transportation
Department, that completes the series of improvements
the Street Transportation team began in 2003 to improve
pedestrian comfort and trail connectivity in the South
Mountain community. The first project in the series was
the 2005 Baseline Road Public Art Project (with Ten Eyck
Landscape Architects), which improved the multi-use trail
system of the area and added shade enhancements for
transit riders along the Baseline corridor. The second was
the 2009 Zanjero’s Line - Highline Canal Public Art Project
(also with Ten Eyck Landscape Architects), improving
four miles of trail and crossings on the historic irrigation
lateral along the base of South Mountain. Passage bolsters
South Mountain Community Library’s connection to its
surroundings by fusing poetry and place with public
Walkability art. It combines “acoustic” chairs, plaza enhancements,
poetry trellises and a new pedestrian crossing of the
Western Canal. The library plaza and trellis enhancements
were developed in partnership with the South Mountain
Community College District and Phoenix Library
Department. The final project component is a new bridge
across the Western Canal. It was designed to link the library
and South Mountain Community College campus with
the Arizona Agribusiness and Equine Center commercial
complex to the south. The immovable wheels flanking the
bridge entrances are a visual play on the history of movable
bridges that once spanned the Salt River Valley canals. The
bridge was designed by Harries and Heder with percentfor-art funds administered by the Phoenix Office of Arts
and Culture Public Art Program. It was built using Federal
transportation enhancement moneys administered by the
Phoenix Street Transportation Department. Combined
with the public art of plaza and walkway, it strengthens
pedestrian pleasures and access in a community of
increasingly connected trails.
g's artistic adaptation of the courtyard for the Municipal Court combines architecture, landscape, art and hroundcover with a canopy of more than 85 mesquite trees, which are historically native to the site. A geoms decorative rugs that extend from the building's entrance to surrounding streets in a gesture of welcome.to psychologically emit a sense of calm to the users of the building whose purpose within can often be anxLocation 300 West WashingtoArtist Brad Goldberg
Type Landscape and sidewDate 1999
District: 7
Shadow Play
Location: Roosevelt Street between 1st Street and 4rd Street
Artist: Meejin Yoon of Höweler + Yoon Architecture/MY Studio
Type: Sculptural shade structures, seating, solar, lighting and landscaping
Date: 2015
District: 7
Sky Looms Location: 3030 West Dunlap Ave, Phoenix
Artist: John Runnels (TX)
Landscape Architect: Waibel & Associates (AZ)
Type: Transit shade structure and landscape improvement
Date: 2016
District: 1
79
All city of Phoenix fleet will be fueled by alternative fuels,
including electricity.
The city fleet will continue to transition to low carbon alternative fuels. Currently,
73% of the fuel used by the fleet is powered by an alternative fuel. Electric
medium and heavy-duty vehicles, such as fire trucks, street sweepers, buses,
and refuse trucks are becoming available on the market, providing for more
alternative fuel vehicle options. Hydrogen may also play a significant role as a
fuel for medium-and heavy-duty vehicles in the long term.
CITY LEAD // Public Works, Public Transit, Aviation, Police, Fire
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
TS2.1
GOAL 2
TARGET 2
100% Alternative
Fuels or Electric
BASELINE
0.5%5
Ongoing Actions
Increase the
community-wide use
of low carbon fuels
(i.e., fuels other than
gasoline and diesel).
ELECTRIC BUSES
During the summer of 2020, Valley Metro tested battery electric buses
from three different manufacturers on multiple urban, high density routes.
Previous trials of electric buses, in 1994 and 2016, were unsuccessful because
they were unable to provide the operating range necessary in the desert
climate. The use of air conditioning causes the battery to deplete more
quickly and limits the range of the bus to less than 100 miles. Three buses
tested were found to be able to be piloted on circulator routes without the
need for fast charging. Valley Metro is pursuing an initial, small investment
in electric buses to gain operational and maintenance experience, and
determine the lifecycle costs of the electric buses in the Phoenix metro area.
The city of Phoenix will continue to explore the use of electric buses and will
be able to deploy electric buses when products come to market that can
accommodate the local environmental and geographical range conditions.
This will help create attainable goals for the acquisition of additional electric
bus use in the region.57
80
The majority of new garbage trucks will be replaced with
cleaner burning options such as compressed natural gas
(CNG) or electric as they become available.
As part of cleaner air initiatives, diesel-engine solid waste trucks
are being replaced with CNG-fueled ones, increasing air quality
and reducing GHG emissions. Nearly every new garbage truck is
powered by CNG and is slow filled overnight in the yard where they
are maintained. CNG fuel reduces emissions and particulates and
with overnight fueling saves employee time waiting in line to fuel
daily, further reducing emissions. By 2030, the majority of existing
garbage trucks will be replaced with cleaner burning alternative
fuel trucks. The Solid Waste Field Services division utilizes a fleet
of alternative fuel equipment to collect, reuse and recycle green
organics, and bulk trash from approximately 400,000 residential
customers each week and uses 100% alternative fuel, with 150 units
using CNG, and 60 of which use ultra-low NOx CNG engines.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
TS2.2 Ongoing Actions
Advocate for state and local regulations that promote
alternative fuel sales in the Phoenix metropolitan area.
Alternative fuels are fuels that are not gasoline or regular diesel.
These fuels are used in place of fossil fuels to decrease GHG
emissions. It is important to advocate for further local GHG emissions
reductions from state and local regulations that promote alternative
fuel sales in the Phoenix metropolitan area as directed by the Mayor
and City Council.
CITY LEAD // Office of Government Relations
PARTNERSHIPS // ADEQ
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
TS2.3 Pending Actions
Solid Waste Garbage Trucks
being slow-filled with
compressed natural gas.
81
GOAL 3
TARGET 3
50% of annual new car
sales to be EVs by 2030;
500 charging ports on
city properties by 2030
BASELINE
2.3% of annual
new car sales are EVs;
62 charging ports on
city properties
Rapidly accelerate electric
vehicle (EV) adoption in the
community and expand
publicly accessible EV charging
infrastructure throughout the
city to result in 50% of all
vehicle sales being electric
vehicles by 2030.
Electric Vehicles and Electric
Vehicle Supply Equipment
Electric Vehicle (EV) deployment is one of several measures that will
greatly reduce emissions from mobile sources, particularly light-duty
vehicles and medium-heavy-duty trucks, which account for approximately
66% of nitrogen oxides, an ozone precursor, and other hazardous air
pollutants. In analyzing pathways for GHG reduction, the city of Phoenix
has identified the need to promote and adopt electrification via widescale EV deployment to be among the primary solutions for reducing GHG
reduction targets by 2050. Phoenix has committed to an ambitious goal
of a 100% net-zero greenhouse gas emissions city fleet by 2050. Electric
vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) deployment should be scaled to reduce
range anxiety and encourage higher EV penetration rates as consumers
become more confident in charging accessibility.
Electric vehicles provide many benefits to consumers, including lower
maintenance, lower fuel cost, and zero tailpipe emissions. EVs result in
60% fewer GHGs from upstream emissions (electricity generation) as
compared to internal combustion gasoline burning engines and have
the potential for significant improvement in local air quality, reducing
both particulate matter and ozone. Although estimates vary on the
adoption curve of electric vehicles, if 10% of vehicles were electric by
2025, total transportation emissions would decrease by approximately
5%. In addition, EVs have a lower operating cost (with a cost per charge
equivalent to $0.30/gallon) and have the long-term potential for further
emission reductions as the electricity grid decarbonizes over time. This
possible action area includes providing increased electric vehicle charging
infrastructure at home, work and public locations and on the road, and
bulk purchasing of battery electric vehicles (BEVs) by the community to
reduce upfront costs. Innovation in battery technology combined with
extensive public charging availability in the next five years could reduce
concern over the current shorter range of EVs.
Annual sales of new light-duty vehicles in Arizona fluctuate each year
from roughly 385,000 to 400,000, and PHEVs and BEVs combined account
for approximately 2.3% of annual sales. This indicates that EVs are still in
an early adoption phase. Battery electric vehicles (BEVs) sales will continue
to increase and be the larger share of the electric drivetrain market, while
the market share attributable to plug-in hybrids (PHEVs), vehicles that are
hybrid that can be charged by plugging into an external power source,
will continue to increase but be a much smaller portion of the future EV
sales. EV batteries are becoming more efficient, with longer range options,
and cheaper to manufacture. Estimates show that the price of EVs will
reach price parity with the internal combustion engine vehicles by 2024,
as shown in the chart below. As of April 2021, the city of Phoenix fleet
currently has one PHEV, and ten light duty BEVs.
82
The role of hydrogen (fuel cell electric vehicles) in transportation
Hydrogen as a fuel has been an emerging technology for decades and could have a significant role in the longterm transition to zero-carbon transportation—particularly for medium and heavy duty equipment. Hydrogen
combined with a fuel-cell produces electricity and, therefore, could provide an alternative to large batteries for
energy storage. References in this plan to electrification of transportation includes a small share of hydrogen
(2% of vehicles by 2030) powered fuel cells, but the significance of its role will be more clearly defined in future
plans as the technology develops.
83
According to Arizona Department of Transportation, as of FY20, there are over 7.8 million vehicles registered in Arizona, and
34,898 vehicles registered as PHEVs and BEVs combined.58 Based on data collected from the U.S. Department of Energy’s
Alternative Fuels Data Center, approximately 598 Level 2 charging ports are located within the Phoenix metro area. Electrify
America is a leader in EV charging and offers the most public DC Fast Chargers stations in the U.S. and have deployed over 2,000
DC Fast Chargers at nearly 500 locations across 42 states, including Arizona. The city is currently collaborating with Electrify
America on the possibility of locating additional DC Fast Chargers within the city of Phoenix boundaries.
Currently, there are over 100 different EV makes and models on the new and used markets for purchase and the promise of all
major manufacturers adding more makes and models in the coming years. EVs made up approximately 2.4% of the U.S. auto
sales as of 2020. However, the growth in EVs is continuing to climb and by 2030, EVs will account for an estimated 50% of all lightduty vehicle sales—a target set by the current federal administration in partnership with U.S. auto makers.18
The city’s clean air, clean energy, and GHG emission reduction targets require an ever-increasing percentage of EV market
penetration. Phoenix will continue to collaborate with local utility companies to provide and promote EV and EVSE
purchasing incentives, enact EV building codes, address EV equity
concerns, as well as continue to provide community awareness
and outreach for the EV programs.
The goal of the city of Phoenix EV Program is to promote the
adoption of consumer light-duty EVs and PHEVs by increasing
infrastructure availability, increasing community awareness,
creating dealership and utility relationships, implementing EV
ready building codes, and initiating an aggressive municipal green
fleet replacement strategy to reduce GHG emissions from the
transportation sector by 2050.
STATEWIDE PLAN FOR ELECTRIFICATION OF TRANSPORTATION
Arizona Public Service (APS), Tucson Electric Power (TEP) and other stakeholders developed the Statewide
Transportation Electrification Plan (STEP) in 2020 that projected 1 million EVs will be on Arizona roads by 2030 and nearly
5 million by 2040. The 2020 STEP described the planning efforts by APS and TEP to support transportation electrification
in Arizona to create a solid foundation for all subsequent policies, programs, and initiatives across the state. The
information provided in this plan will be used to assist in future EV planning efforts and provide additional framework to
develop city EV policies, programs and procedures.
84
Complete construction of the PHX Sky Train®.
The automated PHX Sky Train® connects travelers between the Valley Metro
Light Rail 44th Street and Washington stop and the airport. 1.9 miles have been
completed with 2.5 additional miles scheduled for completion by 2022.
CITY LEAD // Aviation
PARTNERSHIPS // Valley Metro
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
TS3.1 Quickstart Actions
Providing a vital transit link to the region, the automated PHX
Sky Train® connects travelers between the Valley Metro Light
Rail 44th Street and Washington stop and the airport. The
PHX Sky Train® is an electric people-mover system that allows
one of the country’s busiest airports to alleviate roadway
congestion and enhance customer service. The initial 1.9- milelong PHX Sky Train® segment transports users to Phoenix Sky
Harbor’s East Economy Parking Area and Terminals 3 and 4 in
less than 5 minutes. This convenient multi-modal connection
improves ridership on the Valley Metro Light Rail by both the
traveling public and airport employees, further connecting our
community with sustainable transportation options. By 2030,
93,142 passengers will take the PHX Sky Train® daily based
upon a 2019 ridership study. Currently under construction, the
final phase of the PHX Sky Train® will add 2.5 miles of guideway
and connect to the Rental Car Center, completing the circuit
and allowing the airport to retire its CNG bus fleet to the Rental
Car Center. Completion of the final segment of the PHX Sky
Train® in 2022 and construction of the 24th Street Station at
PHX will reduce an additional 69,000 MT CO2eq per year.
PHX Sky Train®
85
Increase EV Infrastructure development in single-family, multi-family
and commercial properties through incentives and building codes.
Planning and Development staff will collaborate with building organizations
and other stakeholders to identify incentives and code considerations and
ensure all concerns are addressed and incorporated into the building code
adoption process. An EV Ready Building Code Policy will be developed and
incentives addressing EV charging parking requirements for new multi-family
and commercial construction developments and connection requirements for
new single-family construction to include information on conduit, wiring, and
electrical capacity. A strategy will be developed to streamline the administrative
process and decrease application timelines for simplifying the city permitting
process for property owners who wish to install charging infrastructure on
existing single-family, multi-family, and commercial properties.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability, Planning and Development
PARTNERSHIPS // APS, SRP, Developers
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Develop community outreach and EV engagement campaign and
EV Roadmap Action Plan.
Engage regional businesses and EV stakeholder groups to advance EV initiatives.
Launch education and outreach campaigns to bring awareness of EV benefits,
costs, charging basics, and incentives available to assist in promoting the
advancement of EV adoption. Create city staff EV team to act as internal EV
advocacy and outreach ambassadors to assist in informing Departments and
participating in EV events. Develop an equity-based EV Roadmap that outlines
the steps to achieve the 2030 EV goals.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // ASU, APS, SRP, Local Auto Dealers
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Quickstart Actions
Ongoing Actions
TS3.2
TS3.3
86
Implement equity principles into EV policies and programs.
Develop a strategy to expand eMobility access to overburdened
communities that have relatively fewer transportation resources and
options and that are impacted the most by climate change. Promote
inclusive collaboration to ensure all communities have a voice in helping
to shape EV policies and programs. Prioritize initiatives that maximize
benefits to vulnerable communities. Potential initiatives could be
related to rebates for members of income qualifying programs that
target the purchase of EV or EV charging stations, car-share programs,
micromobility incentives for e-bikes and e-scooters, or other clean energy
transportation solutions.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // ASU, APS, SRP, Local Auto Dealers
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Increase EV charging infrastructure installations on city
managed/owned properties.
A citywide EV charging infrastructure plan and policy will be developed for
Phoenix that will include equity considerations when identifying locations
for EV charging accessible by the public, fleet and city employees. A
citywide EV charging infrastructure plan and policy will be developed for
Phoenix that will include equity considerations when identifying locations
for EV charging stations. Continue to seek out funding opportunities to
accelerate vehicle electrification and EV charging infrastructure that may
significantly defray the cost of both new fleet vehicles and associated
charging infrastructure.
CITY LEAD // All Departments
PARTNERSHIPS // APS, SRP
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
Ongoing Actions
Ongoing Actions
TS3.4
TS3.5
87
Replace the light-duty municipal internal combustion engine city
fleet with EVs where operationally feasible.
An action team comprised of existing Fleet Managers and maintenance staff
will be formed to provide training and awareness raising of vehicle makes
and model opportunities that are available and forthcoming. A Green Fleets
Program and Procurement Policy will be developed by 2022 that will reflect how
decisions will be made about vehicle purchasing and replacement so that at
each decision point, consideration and analysis is given to purchasing a vehicle
that would reduce or eliminate carbon emissions. Update the centralized
procurement policy and/or process to enable the consideration of total cost
of ownership. Use vehicle lease-to-own programs, where financially sound, in
accordance with the Climate Mayor’s Purchasing Collaborative to procure future
EVs. Conduct pilot programs to include medium to heavy duty fleet equipment
(ex. transit buses, solid waste trucks, and street sweepers).
CITY LEAD // Public Works, Office of Sustainability, Aviation, Police, Fire
PARTNERSHIPS // APS, SRP
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
Increase EV adoption by the public to achieve 50% of new car sales
to be EV by 2030.
Develop city incentive programs and strategies in partnership with utilities and
stakeholders to increase the new vehicle purchases of PHEVs and BEVs market
share from 2% to 50% by 2030. This target goal is in direct alignment with the
federal administration’s Executive Order issued on August 5, 2021, to set a
new EV target adoption date. Coordinate with local auto dealers to develop
programs and incentive opportunities to include purchase and leasing options.
Raise awareness of the used car markets as viable purchasing options.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // APS, SRP, local auto dealers
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
Ongoing Actions
Ongoing Actions
TS3.6
TS3.7
88
Install electric vehicle charging stations for nonroad equipment on city of Phoenix Aviation properties.
Using Voluntary Airport Low Emissions Program (VALE) grants, the Aviation Department is developing electric ground
support equipment infrastructure at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport. Teaming with the airlines, over 100
fuel-driven ground support equipment units have been retired and replaced with electric units. Forty electric charging
stations have been installed and additional infrastructure will be installed in future terminal construction projects.
CITY LEAD // Aviation Department
PARTNERSHIPS // Airlines, Maricopa County
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
TS3.8 Ongoing Actions
More than 100 fossil fuel-driven ground support equipment units
- belt loader, bag tugs, aircraft pushbacks - have been retired and
replaced with electric units by the airlines at Phoenix Sky Harbor
International Airport. Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport (PHX)
through the Aviation Department has requested and received two
grants from the Federal Aviation Administration under the Voluntary
Airport Low Emissions (VALE) program to develop electric ground
support equipment charging infrastructure. Forty charging stations
have been installed by the Airport and additional infrastructure will
be installed in future terminal construction projects. In support of the
Airport’s grant request, Southwest, Airlines, American Airlines and
United Airlines have retired and replaced 100 fossil fuel-powered units
with electric models. Other examples of air quality improvements
made by the Aviation Department include the Trip Fee Program, in
which drivers of alternate fuel vehicles receive a discount, and Cell
Phone Lots where drivers wait for arriving friends and loved ones.
Both initiatives reduce airport roadway congestion and air pollution
from vehicles circling airport grounds while waiting for passengers.
Aircraft ground policies at PHX, such as the use of “one engine taxi”
when aircraft move off the airfield after landing, reduces emissions
while aircraft are on the ground. The 2019 conversion from turf to
desert landscaping decreased emissions from mowing and gaspowered trimming while saving 5 million gallons of water annually in
lawn maintenance.
Voluntary Airport Low
Emissions Program (VALE)
Electric Ground Service
Equipment and Charging Stations
89
Advocate for state and local regulations that incentivize that
new vehicle sales in the Phoenix metropolitan area be batteryelectric or plug-in electric vehicles, including electric vehicle
charging infrastructure.
Federal tax credits are available for some all-electric and plug-in hybrids
models. Policy support at the state and local levels is needed to increase
sales of electric vehicles and will be pursued as directed by the Mayor
and City Council. This includes developing ordinances for electric vehicle
charging infrastructure to support the adoption of electric vehicles.
CITY LEAD // Office of Government Relations
PARTNERSHIPS // Office of Sustainability,
MAG, Maricopa County, APS, SRP
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
TS3.9 Pending Actions
90
Establish a policy that promotes teleworking for city of
Phoenix municipal operations.
Maricopa County Ordinance P-7 Travel Reduction Program requires a
reduction of the amount of travel performed in a single occupancy vehicle
by using alternative forms of travel. Teleworking is an important element of
a travel reduction plan and should be established for city of Phoenix
employees where possible. It is also important to incentivize and promote
teleworking for all employers, regardless of size. During the pandemic,
25% of employees participated in the telework program. An Ongoing
Telework Program will be established to continue to allow those positions
to continue teleworking, when possible.
CITY LEAD // Human Resources Department
PARTNERSHIPS // All Departments
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
GOAL 4 TS4.1
TARGET 4
60%
BASELINE
85%
Quickstart Actions
Reduce the percentage of
single occupant vehicle
trips taken to 60% of all
trips, through land use and
transportation investments
that encourage walkable and
transit oriented communities
while maintaining a
thriving economy.
91
Expand bus service network and service hours, and
introduce new bus rapid transit corridors as part of T2050.
The bus service network is being expanded to include 75 miles of
bus rapid transit and corridors are being evaluated. Service hours
have been increased to match light rail operating hours, with
increased frequency on high-demand routes to every 15-minutes.
CITY LEAD // Public Transit
PARTNERSHIPS // Street Transportation, Valley Metro
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
Increase the number of light rail miles in Phoenix by
adding high capacity corridors across the city as part
of T2050.
Light rail corridors are being constructed to connect the city.
42 miles of light rail will be added to the already existing
20 miles of light rail.
CITY LEAD // Public Transit
PARTNERSHIPS // Street Transportation, Valley Metro
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
TS4.2 Ongoing Actions
TS4.3 Ongoing Actions
Desert Rose–Desert Sky Transit Facility
92
Continuously evaluate routing efficiencies and reciprocal
agreements as applicable.
The Solid Waste division employs routing efficiencies and utilizes reciprocal
agreements with private haulers and other municipal entities to reduce trips and
distance traveled hauling garbage to transfer stations and landfill. These agreements
provide economic value and increased service efficiency for the solid waste
operations. In addition, the city is evaluating siting of new transfer stations to
reduce emissions and miles driven.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
TS4.4 Ongoing Actions
Transition to digital communications with residents, where possible,
without a decrease in the level of service provided.
A transition to digital communications will decrease GHG emissions by eliminating
the need for printed materials and their distribution. It is important to consider
residents who may not be able to receive communications digitally.
CITY LEAD // Communications Office
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
Make job training for city of Phoenix employees available in a digital format.
Providing job training in a digital format reduces GHG emissions. These reductions
may come from reduced amount of travel to a training facility, reduction of space
dedicated to training, and printing of training materials. Using Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act funds, a learning management system is being
developed that will provide virtual learning opportunities with access to a large
database of training material that will reduce in-person facilitation of training and
reduced hard copy of training materials.
CITY LEAD // Human Resources Department
PARTNERSHIPS // Information Technology Services Department
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
TS4.5 Ongoing Actions
TS4.6 Pending Actions
93
Phoenix Police E-Learning
The Phoenix Police E-Learning platform has been in place for approximately
five years. The initial goal was the delivery of update, best practice or
procedural training to more than 4,000 sworn and civilian employees.
This platform has made it possible to deliver more in-depth training, more
often, and more efficiently. As an example, five mandatory safety courses
are available online that traditionally required safety unit personnel to
deliver in-person during squad briefings or annual trainings. This method
of delivery required many hours of instruction and travel and took months
to complete each year. Since the beginning of 2020, four other courses have
been made available which normally would have required nearly everyone
to attend by travelling to a location and inaccessible for patrol service. By
using the E-learning platform, officers are able to view these courses from
laptops in their patrol vehicles while on the street and when time permits.
This allows for higher officer presence in the community and availability for
assistance to the public.
Recently, the current testing process for sergeant was made available
through the E-Learning system. This method of testing saved the city
approximately $5,000 which would normally have been paid to an external
testing source. Future promotional processes will also be administered
through E-Learning, which increase cost savings.
At the beginning of 2020, deployment of E-Learning classes for basic
academy classes was initiated. Initially, five courses were created which
was the equivalent of 12 hours of training. Since that time, six more courses
have been developed which added 15 hours of training. Three courses
are currently in development which add between 10-14 hours of online
training. The future goal is to have more than 100 hours of traditional, inperson training available through the online platform for the basic academy
courses. A mirrored E-Learning platform was also created in order to make
these same classes available to recruit classes for other law enforcement
agencies that use our training academy. To date, approximately 125 recruits
have received training through the online platform.
The availability of online courses allows students to progress at their own
pace, eliminates the need for instructors to travel to the academy, and
ultimately provides more free time to conduct scenario-based training with
recruits. Scenario-based training gives recruits more practical experience
in situational encounters, teaching them to interact and appropriately deal
with people, problem solve and use safe tactics. Each of these skills are
valuable when becoming officers and engaging with the community.
2020 SUCCESS STORY
By using the E-learning
platform, officers are
able to view these
courses from laptops
in their patrol vehicles
while on the street and
when time permits.
This allows for higher
officer presence
in the community
and availability for
assistance to the public.
94
WASTE AS A RESOURCE
95
Goal WR1: Implement programs to reduce waste,
increase the reuse, recycling and recovery of waste
materials and promote social and economic value.
Goal WR2: Reduce GHG emissions resulting from the
degradation of waste by capturing landfill gas and
converting 100% of the methane (up to 1,500 SCFM)
from the SR 85 landfill into renewable natural gas
as a substitute for fossil natural gas. Have contract
executed and facility constructed and operational by
March 2023.
Goal WR3: Increase waste-diversion participation by
all residents and businesses.
Goal WR4: Transition to green alternatives from
environmentally hazardous materials.
Goal WR5: Expand brownfield redevelopment along
the Rio Salado in Phoenix.
Goal WR6: Reduce GHG emissions from water and
wastewater treatment by capturing biogas from
treatment processes and increasing renewable
sources of energy.
2050
GOAL
Phoenix will create zero waste
through participation in the Circular
Economy where recycled materials are
repeatedly used in products, instead
of using raw materials.
WASTE AS A
RESOURCE (WR)
GOALS
96
businesses recognized
(2021)
Residential
CustomerWaste Diversion
Rate (2020)
Rio Reimagined
project
tons compost
annual capacity
WASTE
by 2050
36%
7,800
ZER0 ACRES
108
55,000
UP TO
97
Most residential and commercial waste ends up in landfills, left
to decompose over decades, producing landfill gas that contains
carbon dioxide and methane—a GHG 28 times more potent
than carbon dioxide. The Phoenix Solid Waste utility processes
approximately one million tons of solid waste each year. This
waste, along with the waste already in the one open and five
closed landfills managed by Phoenix, produced approximately
304,000 MT CO2eq in 2018—an amount equivalent to emissions
from 65,700 cars. Technologies, such as methane gas capture
systems, are used to decrease the amount of GHG gases released
to the atmosphere, but ultimately, limiting the amount of waste
that enters the landfills is the best way to reduce or eliminate GHG
emissions from waste.
In 2016, the Phoenix City Council adopted 2050 sustainability
goals, including an ambitious goal of zero waste by year 2050. A
zero waste city strives to eliminate all discharges to land, water
or air that threaten collective society and environmental health.
Recycling, while a necessary component of any striving zero waste
city, must be matched with other waste diversion methods such
as composting, reduction and reuse to achieve zero waste. In
addition, supporting development of the local circular economy,
where waste is used as a new feedstock for production, is key.
BACKGROUND
98
2017-2018 City of Phoenix Residential Waste Characterization Study
99
Local Government
Leading the Way
In 2016, the Phoenix City Council adopted 2050
sustainability goals, including an ambitious
goal of zero waste by year 2050. A zero waste
city strives to eliminate all discharges to
land, or air that threaten collective society
and environmental health. Recycling, while
a necessary component of any striving zero
waste city, must be complimented with other
waste diversion methods such as composting,
reduction and reuse to achieve zero waste. In
addition, supporting development of the local
circular economy, where waste is used as a new
feedstock for production, is key.
Recycling was first implemented in Phoenix in 1989 as a pilot program. By the year 2000, all Phoenix single family
residential households, the city’s customer base, had access to recycling. Over the program’s first 30 years, recycling
has evolved as packaging and materials change. For example, the city no longer receives phonebooks, but now receives
more cardboard than ever before. To ensure efficiency, recycling facilities must incorporate new technologies to meet
the changes in material composition of the recycling stream to maximize the system’s ability to recover material. In
December 2019, Phoenix upgraded its north recycling facility which both improved the capture of recyclables and
decreased contamination of the final commodity. The upgrade was made possible through a partnership with the city of
Peoria and the Closed Loop Fund.
Recycling and composting right and finding alternative solutions for material recovery is crucial to mitigate waste-related
climate impacts. For example, to provide an alternative recycling option for plastic bags, in 2007, the city collaborated
with the Arizona Food Marketing Alliance and local grocery stores to implement Bag Central Station. The program allows
residents to recycle plastic bags, dry cleaning bags, produce bags, and more at any grocery store or big retailer across the
valley. The program has been widely successful in diverting plastic bags from ending up in household recycling, which
is not currently an acceptable material. Phoenix regularly evaluates alternative solutions as many materials are
considered a value-added resource if source separated by the appropriate engineering function and delivered to a
specific end-market.
Recycling in Arizona is not mandatory. Regardless, Phoenix has achieved exceptional participation with at least 90% of its
households voluntarily participating in the recycling program. Although, much can be done to advance education around
what is acceptable in this program (contamination reduction).
Since education is critical in preventing contamination in household recycling, in late 2019, the city of Phoenix
collaborated with eleven cities in the Phoenix metro area to launch a unified marketing effort for recycling education
using the ReCollect Waste Wizard. The Wizard is a web-based search engine that allows residents to look up a material to
see how to properly recycle or dispose of it. To date, ten of the eleven cities, including Phoenix, have been added into the
Wizard. The goal of the program is to standardize recycling education across the Valley.
While Phoenix can offer recycling to single-family households, per a city ordinance, both businesses and multi-family
complexes must receive trash and recycling services from a private hauler. In many cases, businesses and complexes
may not have recycling, whether due to added costs or lack of dedicated space or capacity. In response to this, Phoenix
worked with the Arizona Multi-Housing Association to create an ordinance requiring that new multi-family housing
build in dedicated capacity for recycling to encourage these complexes to add recycling service. In addition, Phoenix
distributed numerous Eco-stations, large recycling dumpsters often found in city parks, to offer a recycling option for
Compost being processed at the 27th Avenue Composting Facility.
100
residents who do not have access to recycling through their multifamily complex. In 2017, the city implemented the
Phoenix Green Business program to recognize businesses that take initiatives on sustainability including their waste
diversion practices.
Composting was first piloted in Phoenix in 2013, although the city has been managing a chip and grind operation since
1995. The pilot composting program was possible through a small-scale processing facility, and in 2017, the city opened
its first industrial composting facility. The 27th Avenue Compost Facility is the first solid waste infrastructure project
in the United States, and the first in Arizona, to earn an Envision recognition from the Institute for Sustainable
Infrastructure.59 The facility can currently process up to 55,000 tons of organics per year, and with further assessment
and funding to support infrastructure, the potential to scale the facility to improve capture is feasible. The city’s waste
characterization studies have revealed that over 40% of what is placed in the trash container is compostable material.
When sent to the landfill, compostable material anaerobically breaks down producing methane gas, which is a
contributor to greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, studies have shown that the lack of air in a landfill prevents true
decomposition, thereby mummifying even organic materials like food. The compost facility is crucial in diverting organic
waste from the landfill.
Since methane gas has a higher global warming potential than carbon dioxide, the City’s State Route 85 Landfill has
implemented a rigorous methane capture system to reduce emissions from the landfill. Methane is currently flared but
plans for the future include reusing methane for renewable fuel.
Since 2013, Phoenix has been a pioneer city in the United States in developing a local circular economy, which is
crucial in fostering local businesses and decreasing reliance of exporting materials outside of Arizona (local material
accountability). To encourage this type of innovative culture, Phoenix has designated 50 acres of city-owned land
adjacent to its 27th Avenue Transfer Station as the Resource Innovation Campus (RIC), a home for valuable public-private
partnerships through land leases, infrastructure support and access to the city’s waste stream and feed stock. The idea
behind the RIC is that it serves as a gathering place for collaboration and solutions that can increase the diversion and
conversion of waste locally in Phoenix. It is also where waste-to-product projects and other waste reduction ideas can
be nurtured and developed. Lastly, the RIC is a hub for innovators building Phoenix’s circular economy and generating
sustainable economic development. The RIC creates the ability for local feedstock to be transformed into new products
without the need for costly transportation and international reliance when it comes to remanufacturing.
Resource Innovation Center
101
Oops/Shine On Program
The Phoenix Public Works Department implemented a new recycling program that gives residential
customers individualized feedback on what can and cannot be recycled. The city launched a pilot
program with 1,200 households in southeast Phoenix with historically high contamination. The
city monitors data from each recycling route to determine which neighborhoods have the highest
contamination rates. At the beginning of the program, about 72% of residential customers had recycling
contamination and received an “Oops” tag. At the end of the program, five weeks later, 73% of residential
customers received “Shine on” tags. Recycling contamination significantly impacts the success of a
recycling program and contaminated materials end up in the landfill. Phoenix has an average recycling
contamination rate of 30%. Unclean food containers, lawn clippings, old clothes, wooden items and
greasy pizza boxes cannot be recycled, yet people regularly put these items in their recycling bins. Other
non-recyclables, such as plastic bags and wrappings, can cause mechanical malfunctions that slow down
the sorting process.
KEY ACHIEVEMENT
Do Not Bag Recyclables
and no garbage
No ponga reciclables en
bolsas y nada de basura
No Plastic Bags or Soft Plastic
(return to retail)
No incluya bolsas de plástico ni plástico
blando (devolver al comercio minorista)
No Pet Food Bags or Chip
Bags/Candy Wrappers
No incluya bolsas de alimentos para
mascotas ni bolsas de papas fritas/
envoltorios de caramelo
No Food, Liquid or
Yard Waste
No incluya alimentos, líquidos
o residuos de jardín
No Tanglers, (no hoses,
wires, chains, or electronics)
Nada que se enrede, (no
mangueras, alambre, cadenas o
productos electrónicos)
No Foam
No poliestireno
No Wood, Scrap Metal,
Furniture or Air Filters
No incluya madera, desechos
metálicos, muebles o
filtros de aire
No Paper Towels or Napkins
No toallas, servilletas o
pañuelos de papel
OTHER (OTRO)
If you continue to contaminate your
recycle container, we may remove it.
SI CONTINÚA CONTAMINANDO SU CONTENEDOR DE
RECICLAJE, ES POSIBLE QUE LO RETIREMOS.
OOPS!
PLEASE REMOVE CONTAMINATION FAVOR DE QUITAR LA CONTAMINACIÓN
PLEASE LEAVE THESE ITEMS OUT!
¡FAVOR DE NO ECHAR ESTOS ARTÍCULOS!
Questions/Concerns
Please Call 602-262-6282 PREGUNTAS/PREOCUPACIÓNES, LLAME AL 602-262-6282
102
Reuse recycled asphalt in street pavement pilot program.
The Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) Project is assessing the cost
effectiveness and performance using different proportions of RAP
on Phoenix streets as part of traditional paving materials. Phase II
was recently completed, which involved performance tests on a road
section within the city. If the pilot is successful, this process will be
applied on many city streets.
CITY LEAD // Street Transportation
PARTNERSHIPS // Public Works, Arizona State University
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
WR1.1
GOAL 1
TARGET 1
To be
determined
BASELINE
To be
determined
Quickstart Actions
Implement programs to
reduce waste, increase
the reuse, recycling and
recovery of waste materials
and promote social and
economic value.
103
Continue to identify and collect waste materials to recycle
Programs are in place to recycle used fluorescent lamps, tires, batteries
and steel, which can generate revenue. In fiscal year 2019-2020, 27,343
tires and 10,350 batteries were recycled. Approximately 1,100 tons of
steel is recycled annually.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
WR1.2 Ongoing Actions
For over 30 years, the city of Phoenix has offered a
program for the recycling and proper disposal of
Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) with the goal of;
protecting human health and the environment,
preventing operational hazards and increasing the
diversion of hazardous waste materials from the city’s
landfill. Historically, the city has offered event-style
collection of household hazardous waste items. However,
in March 2020, due to the Covid-19 health pandemic
and related safety concerns, the Phoenix Public Works
Department (PWD) transitioned from its traditional eventstyle collections to a singular more socially distant HHW
option, vendor drop-offs. With City Council approval,
in January 2021, the city kicked off its pilot HHW home
collection program and within days received over 1,000
service requests from its residents.
For more information, go to
www.phoenix.gov/hhw
Household
Hazardous Waste
Household Hazardous Waste
Collection Event
104
Continue to implement reuse programs to eliminate waste by
reusing items previously identified as waste.
Waste materials are identified and collected for reuse. The Make Ready program
reuses auto parts reducing waste sent to the landfill and saving over $120,000 in
fiscal year 2019-2020.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
Continue to implement waste reduction programs at the two material recovery
facilities, including a composting facility that recovers organic waste.
Material recovery facilities (MRFs) are specialized facilities that receive, separate, and
prepare recyclable materials for sale. Phoenix has two MRFs, one at the North Gateway Transfer
Station and one at the 27th Avenue Transfer Station. The city’s composting facility was opened in
2017. Phoenix processes roughly 169,000 tons of recyclables and 55,000 tons of organic waste per
year at these facilities.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
WR1.3
WR1.4
Ongoing Actions
Ongoing Actions
Use the Adaptive Reuse Program to continue to assist with streamlining
the process and steps required to repurpose existing buildings for
new business uses.
Repurposing existing buildings for new uses can be challenging. Phoenix’s Adaptive
Reuse Program encourages the reuse (recycling) of buildings to promote business uses
and offers incentives that help bring life to underutilized buildings, supports local
businesses, takes advantage of existing infrastructure and supports our neighborhoods.
During the past five years, the city of Phoenix has assisted 151 qualified adaptive reuse
projects by providing over $450,000 in Adaptive Reuse Incentives.
CITY LEAD // Planning and Development
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
WR1.5 Ongoing Actions
105
The city of Phoenix works on repurposing and reusing
existing buildings citywide through the Adaptive Reuse
Program. The city of Phoenix’s Adaptive Reuse Program
was created in 2008 to assist with streamlining the process
and steps required to repurpose existing buildings for new
business uses.
Program Creation: A task force consisting of community
and business leaders and representatives from various
arts organizations helped the city of Phoenix review
existing codes and identify ways to streamline processes,
relax code requirements for new development, utilize
existing infrastructure and provide business opportunities
by repurposing and reusing existing buildings without
compromising public safety. The task force identified
about 30 policy areas to assist and support the Adaptive
Reuse Program. Some of the most popular policy areas
include providing regulatory relief (not requiring all of the
regulations associated with new build projects), providing
projects with a designated point-of-contact (a designated
staff member from the Office of Customer Advocacy is
assigned to each project), focusing on speed-to-market
opportunities (streamlining measures are in place to
help businesses open their doors sooner) and providing
financial incentives (qualifying projects can benefit from
up to $7,000 in incentives to cover expenses such as plan
review and inspection fees).
Program Impact: During the past five years, the city of
Phoenix has assisted 151 qualified adaptive reuse projects
by providing over $450,000 in Adaptive Reuse Incentives.
Adaptive Reuse
Repurposing existing buildings for new
uses can be challenging. Phoenix’s
Adaptive Reuse Program encourages the
reuse (recycling) of buildings to promote
business uses and offers incentives that
help bring life to underutilized buildings,
supports local businesses, takes
advantage of existing infrastructure
and supports our neighborhoods.
106
Clean Construction
As part of Goal WR1, the city of Phoenix has undertaken several actions which include:
• adoption of a goal for requiring net-positive new construction in terms of both energy and
materials by 2050
• adoption of the goal to become a carbon neutral city operating on 100% clean energy
• adoption of the most current energy-efficiency standards of the 2018 International Energy
Conservation Code
• adoption of the 2018 International Plumbing Code which incorporates water-conserving
plumbing fixtures and systems
• voluntary compliance with the 2012 Phoenix Green Construction Code which incorporates
standards to reduce embodied carbon emissions
• streamlining of the permitting process for solar photovoltaic systems
• approval of the Sonoran Studio—the city’s first project to meet the Living Building Challenge
• adoption of an Adaptive Reuse Ordinance with financial incentives to promote the
repurposing of existing building stock to keep Demolition and Construction materials out of
the waste stream
Additionally, the city of Phoenix is working to expand our commitments to clean construction, energy efficiency
and reduced emissions through the following actions:
• work with providers of embodied carbon calculators (such as Athena and EC3) to develop
calculators applicable to our climate zone and to test those tools on a sample of the
building stock
• establish a working group to discuss incentives for developers to utilize embodied carbon
calculators, comply with the green construction code and expand adaptive reuse of existing
buildings
• work with stakeholders to develop the following recommendations for Council consideration:
– to adopt the enhanced energy and water-conservation standards of the 2021
International Energy Conservation Code and the 2021 International Plumbing Code
– allow voluntary compliance with the 2021 Green Construction Code
– creation and adoption of an Electric Vehicle Charging Station infrastructure ordinance
107
Capture and reuse methane as vehicle fuel as part of the Landfill
Gas Recovery Project at SR-85 Landfill.
State Route 85 (SR-85) Landfill is Phoenix’s only active landfill and receives
over one million tons of waste per year from Phoenix and other sources. The
waste decomposes and produces landfill gas that is roughly half methane
and half carbon dioxide. A project will be developed in the future to capture
the landfill gas and use it as fuel.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
WR2.1 GOAL 2
TARGET 2
To be determined
BASELINE
75% of methane
collected
and flared
Quickstart Actions
Reduce GHG emissions resulting from
the degradation of waste by capturing
landfill gas and converting 100% of
the methane (up to 1,500 SCFM) from
the SR 85 landfill into renewable
natural gas as a substitute for fossil
natural gas. Have contract executed
and facility constructed
and operational by
March 2023.
Continue to utilize methane capture systems on active and
decommissioned landfills to oxidize methane that is produced
to reduce GHG emissions potential.
Landfill gas capture systems are utilized at SR-85, the city’s only active
landfill, and decommissioned landfills, including Skunk Creek, 27th
Avenue, Deer Valley, 19th Avenue, and Del Rio landfills. These systems
capture methane gas that is produced by decomposing waste and is
combusted to produce a less GHG intensive gas.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
WR2.2 Ongoing Actions
108
GOAL 3
TARGET 3
100%
BASELINE
36% in 2020
for residential
customers
Increase wastediversion participation
by all residents and
businesses.
Provide outreach and feedback to residents what can
and cannot be recycled through presentations to schools
and communities.
The Zero Waste team provides education on proper recycling, including
group tours of the city’s North Gateway Transfer Station and MRF,
educational presentations to schools, neighborhood and community
meetings, and hosting informational booths at community events. In 2019,
the Public Works Zero Waste team interacted with approximately 23,500
community members. In 2020, the Zero Waste team extended its reach
through digital efforts including the creation of Recycle+, the transition
to virtual presentations, and the development of more online resource
documents. These digital practices will continue to provide residents
additional access to the team.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
WR3.1 Ongoing Actions
Compost Council Tour at the Resource Innovation Campus
109
Increase organic diversion from the landfill.
Waste diversion efforts include diversion of organic materials. Through
the Green Organics Residential Collection program, organic material, like
yard trimmings, untreated wood, tree fruit, and cactus, is collected from
residential properties. Additional material is collected directly by the
transfer stations. Program goals include establishing value in the local
compost market by manufacturing a high-quality compost, reducing
environmental and climate impacts from landfilling, and creating more
community awareness around organic commodities and waste.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
WR3.2 Pending Actions
The Public Works Customer Engagement Services (CES)
division has strategically placed large roll off dumpsters
in city-owned parks and near clusters of multifamily
housing complexes. Eco-stations are wrapped with visual
aids and literature on what is acceptable in Phoenix’s
recycling program to further reduce contamination of
recyclable materials and provide community education.
The goal is to increase recyclables captured, the city’s
landfill diversion rate and provide convenient access to
residents and businesses that do not have other recycling
options readily available. Phoenix multifamily residents
and businesses are encouraged to use Eco-stations to place
their recyclables in at any time at no cost.
Eco-stations
Eco-station
110
Increase number of businesses that participate in the Phoenix
Green Business Leader Program that recognizes Phoenix businesses
that have sustainable practices, including increased waste diversion.
The Green Business Leader (GBL) program started in 2017 to create public-private
partnerships to further waste diversion in the city. In 2019, the GBL program
expanded to recognize businesses for efforts around water conservation, energy
efficiency and sustainable purchasing, in addition to waste diversion. There are
more than 100 certified Green Businesses.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS // Office of Sustainability, Office of Environmental Programs,
Water Services
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
WR3.3 Pending Actions
The Phoenix Green Business Leader Program,
initiated in 2017 by the Public Works Department,
recognizes Phoenix businesses that are passionate
about sustainability. The program initially focused on
waste diversion-related activities such as recycling
or composting. To improve the program and provide
additional value to Phoenix businesses, the Public
Works Department partnered with the Water Services
Department, the Office of Sustainability, and the
Office of Environmental Programs in 2019 to expand
the GBL program to recognize businesses for efforts
around water conservation, energy efficiency
and sustainable purchasing, in addition to waste
diversion. The expansion also includes a three-tiered
certification system of green, gold or platinum level,
depending on the number of sustainable actions a
business achieves within their business practices.
Green Business
Leader Program
Number of Certified Green Businesses: 108 (2021)
• 47 Platinum Certifications
• 17 Gold Certifications
• 44 Green Certifications
The city launched the Diversion Tracking Tool
in mid-2018 which measures waste diversion
related to Green Businesses. The cumulative
tonnage from 14 of the 108 that record
their tonnage:
• 5,400 tons recycled
• 13 tons composted
• 92 tons donated
111
Increase number of businesses that participate in the
“green tenant” program at Sky Harbor International Airport.
As part of the Aviation Department Sustainability Management Plan Update,
a voluntary “Green Tenant” program is being developed to encourage greater
collaboration between the Aviation Department and airport tenants on airport
sustainability goals. The Aviation Department met the waste diversion goal of
40% in 2019, a year earlier than targeted.
CITY LEAD // Aviation
PARTNERSHIPS // Airport Tenants
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Increase the number of existing buildings that are repurposed
instead of demolished.
In addition to reuse of materials, it is important to reuse buildings through
the Adaptive Reuse Ordinance where existing buildings are repurposed.
There are eleven adaptive reuse projects underway in Eastlake-Garfield,
four in Midtown, nine in Uptown, and two in Gateway.
CITY LEAD // Planning and Development
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Long Term
WR3.4
WR3.5
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
112
Continue using vegetable-based inks that are formulated to
reduce solvents.
Volatile organic compounds are chemicals that evaporate quickly and
are precursors to ozone. One way to limit their use is to transition to
vegetable-based inks that are formulated to minimize and, in some
cases, eliminate the use of volatile organic compounds as much as
possible. The City Clerk Department Print Services Section currently
uses vegetable-based inks.
CITY LEAD // City Clerk
PARTNERSHIPS // State of Arizona
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Use digital communication or recycled paper when possible.
To decrease the production of waste from paper-based transactions
and communications, digital communications will replace paperbased communications. If paper is still necessary, the paper that is
used should contain recycled content. City operations has recently
transitioned to the use of 100% recycled paper.
CITY LEAD // Communications, City Clerk, Human Resources
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
WR4.1
WR4.2
GOAL 4
TARGET 4
To be
determined
BASELINE
To be
determined
Ongoing Actions
Ongoing Actions
Transition to green
alternatives from
environmentally
hazardous materials.
113
Update Sustainable Purchasing Policy to be applicable city-wide
in future city contracts.
The Sustainable Purchasing Policy was created to integrate contract provisions
for more sustainable products and services and to consider the best value
considering price, performance, and environmental characteristics over the
lifecycle of the product or service. Currently, special terms and conditions exist
for the Office of Environmental Programs regarding air quality, energy star/energy
efficiency, environmentally-preferred products, hazardous materials, recovered
materials, etc. These terms and conditions need to be updated to reflect
current city environmental policy and then rolled-out citywide to procurement
templates, barring conflicts with already existing regulations, so all departments
and their respective vendors can more readily select, incorporate, and enforce
them when applicable to their solicitations.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Finance
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
WR4.3 Ongoing Action
Transition from Primarily Paper-Based to Electronic Delivery
The City Clerk Department has focused on eliminating paper-based workflows wherever possible and implemented
methods of engaging and servicing customers more efficiently with environmentally friendly service delivery
methods. In December 2012, the City Clerk Department implemented a Campaign Finance e-filing system that allows
candidates and Political Action Committees to submit campaign finance reports online. Starting in November 2020,
electronic delivery of information and other tools were implemented for city elections. For the candidate nomination
petition process, the City Clerk Department offered candidate packet information online. This is more cost effective
and provides candidates and other interested parties access to the most up-to-date information daily. Additionally,
in May 2020 the City Clerk Department increased resources for candidates and voters through a partnership with
the Secretary of State’s Office (SOS). The City Clerk Department worked with the SOS to modify the SOS’s E-QUAL
(electronic candidate nomination petition system) for use by local jurisdictions for the first time. This system allows
candidates to collect the required nomination signatures online minimizing the need for distribution of paper
nomination petitions in person. More recently, the City Clerk Department in conjunction with ITS implemented a
new eComments and Request to Speak system that allows residents to provide comments and submit requests
to speak on Council agenda items electronically, giving them an alternative to in-person participation at Council
meetings. This system not only minimizes the environmental impact of the need for physical appearance at City
Council Meetings, it also offers an additional opportunity to enhance citizen engagement in public meetings.
Additionally, and working with ITS, the City Clerk Department implemented the ability to accept contracts and other
documents electronically using Adobe Sign or similar software to obtain electronic signatures. Implementation of
this electronic process minimizes the strain on natural resources by decreasing the use of paper, ink printers and
other resources thereby minimizing the overall environmental impact and making the document routing process
more efficient and economical. The City Clerk Department’s commitment to offering electronic services allows the
Department to provide services to more customers in an efficient manner while continuing to meet and sustain
environmental goals.
114
Increase the cleanup and redevelopment of brownfields in
the Rio Reimagined Project area.
The Rio Reimagined Project encompasses more than 78,000 acres and
1,189 potential brownfields. Cleaning up and reuse of these properties
brings community, economic, and environmental benefits. The Rio
Salado, Agua Fria and Gila Rivers will be revitalized by reconnecting
the community with the river and be a catalyst for economic growth.
Utilize resources obtained through a U.S. EPA grants to conduct
environmental assessments and cleanup.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs, Community and
Economic Development
PARTNERSHIPS // U.S. EPA, ADEQ, ASU, Cities of Avondale, Buckeye,
Mesa, and Tempe
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
WR5.1
GOAL 5
TARGET 5
To be
determined
BASELINE
1,189 potential
brownfields
Pending Actions
Expand brownfield
redevelopment along
the Rio Salado
in Phoenix.
115
Rio Salado Habitat Restoration Area
The Rio Salado Habitat Restoration Project is 40 years in the making and the first of its kind in the desert southwest.
Phoenix Rio Salado is a community-inspired plan to restore part of the once-flowing Salt River from a blighted
corridor into an environmental and recreational amenity for the community. Phoenix Rio Salado is a 595-acre area
located two miles south of downtown Phoenix and north of South Mountain Park near Central Avenue at the Salt
River. Thousands of residents and many government agencies, including city of Phoenix’s Parks and Recreation
Department, Water Services Department, and the Office of Environmental Programs in partnership with the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, and Maricopa County Flood Control, were involved with shaping and funding this habitat
resource that spans five miles in length from 19th Avenue to 24th Street. The landscape incorporates lush marshy
wetlands of which 90% of these types of habitats have been lost in Arizona since the 1900’s, native cottonwood and
varieties of willows, which are among North America’s rarest forest type and Mesquite woodlands or bosques as
they are referred to, are the fourth rarest plant community of 104 types identified in the United States other nativedesert plants. All plant material was contract grown and required seed collection of within a 1/2 mile of the Salt
River to ensure a true seed source to restore the environment of Rio Salado. The National Audubon Society’s Nina
Mason Pulliam Rio Salado Audubon Center makes conservation action accessible to everyone by providing useful
information about sustainable living and on-the-ground activities for all to participate. The Rio Reimagined Project
will revitalize the Rio Salado (Salt River), Aqua Fria and Gila Rivers, and the region by transforming over 45 miles of
the river stretching from the Salt River Pima Maricopa Indian Community at the eastern most boundary to the city of
Buckeye to the west and encompassing more than 78,000 acres.
116
Brownfields is a term used to describe real estate that is contaminated or perceived to be contaminated by
hazardous substances or petroleum in soil or groundwater. The complexity and cost of cleanup creates an obstacle
to redevelopment or reuse of the property. Brownfields examples include closed landfills, abandoned gas stations,
old manufacturing facilities, and former dry cleaning facilities. The cleanup and redevelopment of brownfields
brings many economic development benefits to a community.
The Phoenix Brownfields Land Recycling Program provides financial and technical assistance for brownfields
cleanup and redevelopment city-wide through the Office of Environmental Programs and the Community and
Economic Development Department. To date, more than $330 million in private investment has restored more than
320 acres of previously contaminated and has created or maintained approximately 3,000 jobs. In 2020, the city of
Phoenix received a $600,000 Brownfields Assessment Coalition grant for the Rio Reimagined Project with the cities
of Avondale, Tempe, and ASU. The target area for the grant is within 1.0 mile of the Salt River (Rio Salado), Agua Fria
and Gila Rivers within the cities of Tempe, Phoenix and Avondale, Arizona.
Brownfields Land Recycling Program
Del Rio Area Brownfields Plan’s boundary map.
117
Identify water and wastewater facilities where biogas can be
treated, transferred and sold as a renewable green energy
commodity. Investigate other opportunities for biogas capture.
Renewable energy projects provide biological sources of natural gas, which
can displace natural gas from fossil fuel sources. Biogas that is produced as
a result of treatment at the wastewater treatment plants contains methane.
As part of the city’s pledge to be a sustainable and cost-effective utility, a
renewable energy project at 91st Avenue Wastewater Treatment Plant treats,
transfers and sells biogas as a renewable green energy commodity. The city
will investigate other opportunities for biogas capture at other water and
wastewater treatment facilities.
CITY LEAD // Water Services
PARTNERSHIPS // Ameresco, Inc.
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
WR6.1 GOAL 6
TARGET 6
To be determined
BASELINE
10,199 MT
CO2
eq (2018)
Pending Actions
Reduce GHG emissions
from water and wastewater
treatment by capturing
biogas from treatment
processes and increasing
renewable sources of
energy.
118
Financial Sustainability Initiatives
The city of Phoenix manages nearly $2.3 billion to cover
its financial responsibilities and invests these funds in
compliance with all state and federal regulations as well
as the city’s Investment Policy. The current Investment
Policy includes:
• Safeguarding public funds;
• Ensuring liquidity necessary to support
city operations and capital programs; and,
• Earning a rate of return.
In accordance with the city’s Investment Policy, the city
has invested $38 million in green bonds backed by either
Federal National Mortgage Association or Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corp, both Government Sponsored Enterprises.
Currently the city of Phoenix does not have any investments
in fossil fuel companies. The city is actively monitoring
green bond opportunities that meet the criteria stated in
the Investment Policy. In 2019, the city developed one of the
nation’s first Green and Sustainability Bond Frameworks to
attract new investors interested in supporting sustainable
infrastructure. The city’s first issuance of Sustainability Bonds
in 2020 of $127M for water infrastructure was four times
oversubscribed and a success in the marketplace.
PHOENIX
RESILIENCE
119
AIR QUALITY
120
Goal AQ1: Meet U.S. EPA National Ambient Air Quality
Standards (NAAQS).
2050
GOAL
Phoenix will achieve a level of air quality
that is healthy for humans and the
environment. Air quality will meet U.S. EPA
National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS) and World Health Organization
(WHO) standards, and will achieve a
visibility index of good or excellent on 90%
of days or more.
AIR QUALITY (AQ)
GOALS
121
Dust particulate matter
with a diameter of
10 microns or less
Smoke particulate matter
with a diameter of
2.5 microns or less
U.S. EPA
Criteria Pollutants
(Carbon Monoxide, Lead,
ground-level Ozone, Particulate
Matter, Nitrogen Dioxide, and
Sulfur Dioxide.)61
Air quality monitors
throughout
Maricopa County
Signatory City
PM2.5
C40 PM10
CLEAN AIR CITIES
DECLARATION
24
4 6
World Health
Organization Standards
(Ground-level Ozone, Particulate
Matter, Nitrogen Dioxide, and
Sulfur Dioxide.)60
122
Poor air quality impacts every resident in the city of Phoenix. The federal Clean
Air Act (CAA) requires Arizona to create a state implementation plan (SIP) aimed
at meeting National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) that include the
following six criteria pollutants: carbon monoxide, ozone, particulate matter with
a diameter smaller than 10 micrometers (PM-10) and with a diameter smaller
than 2.5 micrometers (PM-2.5), lead, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur dioxide.
These air quality standards must be met within the Maricopa Nonattainment
Area, which includes the city of Phoenix. Of course, air is not contained by city
limits so actions directed at improving air quality must be considered at a regional
level. Phoenix partners with other governmental entities, including Maricopa
County Air Quality Department (MCAQD), Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality (ADEQ), and Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG) to work
toward meeting these standards.
In 2021, Phoenix became a Signatory City of the C40 Clean Air Cities Declaration.
Within two years, Phoenix will establish baseline levels and set ambitious
reduction targets for air pollutants that meet national commitments. As a
C40 City, Phoenix meets the World Health Organization (WHO) air quality
standards for nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide, and will work toward meeting
the standards for particulate matter and ozone. This will be done by including
relevant top pollution-reducing actions into the plan, which includes expanding
public transit, increasing active transport options, modeling air pollution
reduction as a result of actions, and monitoring air quality. As part of the
Declaration, new substantive policies and programs will be implemented by
2025 to address the top causes of air pollution (particulate matter and ozone)
emissions within Phoenix and under Phoenix’s control. Progress will be reported
annually on improvements in air quality relative to the targets that are set.
The greater Phoenix area is currently designated as Moderate Non-attainment
for ozone, and likely to be redesignated to Serious Non-attainment in 2024.
Despite reduced traffic due to the pandemic in 2020, ozone still exceeded
regulatory levels. The area also is designated as Serious Non-attainment for
PM-10 (dust) and is experiencing increasing levels for PM-2.5 (soot) that could
potentially result in the region’s status changed to Non-attainment for PM-2.5.
As the classification becomes more severe, the Clean Air Act requirements
become more stringent and costly. Failure to meet the standard by established
deadlines has economic repercussions.
BACKGROUND
123
Maricopa County Nonattainment Map
124
Local Government Leading the Way
Ozone is a harmful air pollutant to both humans and the
environment. Ozone is formed when nitrogen oxides and
volatile organic compounds react with each other in sunlight.
According to the Maricopa County Air Quality Department, the
majority of nitrogen dioxide emissions comes from mobile
sources, like cars and airplanes. Controlling and understanding
the sources of these emissions is needed so that Phoenix
can meet air quality standards. One of the programs Phoenix
participates in is the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s
(EPA) national Cleaner Trucks Initiative, a program that aims
to establish more stringent emissions standards to reduce
nitrogen oxides and other pollutants from heavy-duty truck
engines. Phoenix has been at the forefront of cleaner air initiatives, demonstrated by Public Works’ commitment to
replacing its fleet of diesel-engine solid waste trucks with CNG-fueled ones. In 2020, the Public Works Department was
awarded $1 million in Diesel Emissions Reduction Act (DERA) grants by EPA to replace some of the department’s dieselfueled trucks. The grant money will be combined with matching funds of $2.1 million from Public Works and its private
partner to purchase nine new solid waste collection trucks and one long-haul truck fueled by compressed natural gas to
replace old, diesel-fueled vehicles.
Another harmful air pollutant is particulate matter that can be pollution from human activities or a result of a dust
storm or wildfire. Particulate matter with a diameter of 10 micrometers or smaller (PM-10) is primarily composed of dust
in Phoenix. Particulate matter with a diameter of 2.5 micrometers or smaller (PM-2.5) is primarily soot from burning
activities, but also comes from vehicle exhaust. Both PM-10 and PM-2.5 are inhalable and can damage the respiratory
system, with PM-2.5 posing a greater risk to health due to its small size. Efforts throughout the region continue to reduce
formation of particulate matter. The largest sources of PM-10 are from roads, paved and unpaved. Much of the efforts to
decrease PM-10 have been focused on stabilizing these surfaces and maintaining them with the use of street sweepers.
In 2011, as part of MAG Five Percent Plan for PM-10, the city established a Dust Reduction Task Force that was specifically
created to address particulate matter emissions throughout the city. Since then, the city has stabilized streets, lots and
alleys, and conducted outreach activities to ensure that residents would become of methods to prevent the formation of
dust. The city of Phoenix has paved over 7 miles of unpaved roads and paved or stabilized over 500 miles of alleys since
2012 as part of the Five Percent Plan.
City employees participate in Maricopa County’s
Travel Reduction Program with the goal to
decrease travel taken in a single occupancy
vehicle. In 2019, 25 million miles of commuting
were reduced, preventing 143 tons of pollution,
solely by city of Phoenix employees.
Continuing to address air quality concerns
on a regional level is paramount. The city
collaborates with various regional entities to
focus on how best to reduce air pollutants
throughout the metropolitan area, including
the Maricopa Association of Governments,
Maricopa County Air Quality Department,
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality,
and other valley municipalities.
PM-10 and PM-2.5
Phoenix received a DERA grant to replace garbage
trucks with cleaner burning engines.
125
City of Phoenix Dust
Reduction Task Force
In 2011, the city of Phoenix was experiencing
high levels of particulate air pollution. This dust
contributed to the infamous “brown cloud,”
increased risk for individuals with respiratory
diseases, and continued high levels would have
led to a loss of billions of dollars in Federal
funding for streets and highway projects needed
throughout the region. To address this class of
pollutants, the city manager established the
Dust Reduction Task Force, which consisted
of various city departments. The Task Force
produced detailed maps of targeted areas,
changes to city code for dust reduction, an
enforcement strategy for the Code focused on
education, dust awareness, response training for
staff, and various multimedia items for outreach.
An example of the work being conducted to
reduce dust creation is seen in the before and
after photographs of the surface stabilization
on the shoulders of Broadway Avenue. Many
residents use the shoulders of this street and
the surface was stabilized to allow continued
use by residents and limit the formation of dust.
Due to the success of the Task Force, Maricopa
Association of Governments has recognized
Phoenix as a regional leader and the Task Force
as a model for other cities in the region.
KEY ACHIEVEMENT
Before and after of surface stabilization on
the shoulders of Broadway Avenue.
126
GOAL 1
TARGET 1
U.S. NAAQS
To be determined
BASELINE
Meet U.S. EPA National
Ambient Air Quality
Standards (NAAQS).
Establish air pollutant baseline levels and set
reduction targets that meet NAAQS.
These targets will put us on a path towards meeting World Health
Organization Air Quality Guidelines for particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide,
ozone, and sulfur dioxide. Phoenix already meets the Guidelines for nitrogen
dioxide and sulfur dioxide.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Maricopa County Air Quality Department,
Maricopa Association of Governments
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Implement new substantive policies and programs to
address top causes of air pollution emissions within
Phoenix and under Phoenix’s control by 2025.
Within five years, Phoenix will implement new substantive policies and
programs to complement those policies and programs already in place.
Some of these already exist and only need to be fully implemented, like
the expansion of the public transit system, including light rail, and the
creation of safe and accessible walkways and bike paths to commute. Many
of the actions within the climate action plan will contribute to decreasing
air pollution emissions throughout the city and region. New policies and
programs may include increased air quality monitoring, financial incentives,
and increased education and outreach.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Maricopa County Air Quality Department
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
AQ1.1
AQ1.2
Quickstart Actions
Quickstart Actions
127
Publicly report annually on progress in reducing pollution levels
relative to targets and achieving the commitments in the Clean
Air Cities Declaration.
Progress will be reported annually to C40 Clean Air Cities and be made
available publicly.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Communications Office
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
AQ1.3 Quickstart Actions
128
LOCAL FOOD SYSTEMS
129
Goal LFS1: All people living in Phoenix will have enough
to eat and have access to affordable, healthy, local, and
culturally appropriate food.
Goal LFS2: Businesses that produce, process, distribute, and
sell local and healthy food will be recognized as integral to
the economy and encouraged to grow and thrive in Phoenix.
Goal LFS3: Growing food in Phoenix and the region will be
easy and valued, for personal or business use.
Goal LFS4: Food-related waste will be prevented, reused,
or recycled via sustainable food production practices that
maintain a healthy environment.
Goal LFS5: Develop food policies and actions that address
local and global challenges posed by climate change,
urbanization, political and economic crises, population
growth and other factors.
2050
GOAL
Maintain a healthy, sustainable,
equitable, and thriving local
food system.
LOCAL FOOD SYSTEMS
(LFS) GOALS
130
Source: A Comprehensive Food Assessment for Maricopa County Summary Report, September 2019, by Maricopa County Food System Coalition
Food Access in Maricopa County
On-Farm Agriculture in Maricopa County
Population that
is food insecure
(Maricopa County)
Children who are
food insecure
(Maricopa County)
In Arizona for total value of
Ag products sold, as well as for
milk, poutry and egg sales
farms share
5% of all sales
or about 60% of farms
are small (1 to 9 acres)
farms share
95% of all sales
or about 30% of farms
reported less than
$1,000 in annual sales
In the nation for
value of milk sales
contributed to Maricopa County
including direct, indirect and
induced multiplier effects
nationally among countries for
vegetable, melon and potato
crop production
Obesity rate
(Maricopa County)
Diabetes rate
(Maricopa County)
Households that
receive SNAP
(Maricopa County)
In total economic
activity for every dollar
in new SNAP benefits
14%
#1
$
2,293 1,495
186 868
#11
$1.95B
TOP 1%
21%
29%
10%
12%
$1.80
131
Direct Output by Industry - 2019
(million of dollars)
Source: USDA, Arizona 2019 Annual Bulletin; IMPLAN Group LLC; Applied Economics LLC.
City of Phoenix
Metro Phoenix
Dairy Cows and Milk
Beef Cattle Ranching
Vegetable and Melon Farming
All Other Crops incl. Hay
Greenhouse & Nursery Products
Cotton Farming
Agriculture Support Services
Grains & Oilseeds
Fruit & Tree Nut Farming
Poultry, Eggs & Other Animals...
$0 $200 $400 $600 $800
132
Phoenix residents approved a Healthy Food System goal in the city’s
general plan, PlanPHX, and was adopted in 2015 to promote the growth
of a healthy, affordable, secure and sustainable food system that makes
healthy food available to all Phoenix residents. In 2016, Phoenix City
Council adopted the 2050 Environmental Sustainability Goals, including a
Local Food System Goal to maintain a healthy, sustainable, equitable, and
thriving local food system.
Healthy food is defined as food that is fresh, nutritious and grown
without harming its producers or our environment.
The food system comprises of food from farm or producer to table or
consumer. A healthy food system increases Phoenix resident’s ability to
access healthy, affordable food. A healthy food system contributes to
economic growth, health, and community by:
• Encouraging consumers to grow their own food and providing
opportunities for urban farmers to sell their food locally, blurring
the lines among growers.
• Supporting all options for furthering access to healthy food
including community gardens, urban farms, farmers markets,
community supported agriculture, healthy food retailers, and new
innovative means.
• Creating a strong community network of successful and culturally
appropriate businesses that produce, process, cook, transport, and
sell food with prevention of food loss and waste.
The goals and actions identified in the local food system section consider
the impacts of drought and water use restrictions and encourage local
food production that is sustainable, regenerative, water efficient, and
grown in accordance with established regulations.
BACKGROUND
133
Status of Local Food System
A common thread heard about food was that it is very
important in terms of connection. Sharing food was a way
to show love, and people also feel that food connects them
to their community. Achievement of local food system goals
results in reduced rates of hunger, obesity, and diet-related
diseases through elimination of food deserts, increasing
urban agriculture, and adopting zoning, land use guidelines,
and other policies to improve the food system. A food desert
as defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture is an area
without ready access to fresh, healthy and affordable food.
Of the 55 food deserts in Maricopa County, there are 43 in
Phoenix that encompass nearly half the Phoenix population.
The term food system is used to denote all processes and
infrastructure involved in growing, harvesting, processing,
packaging, distributing, marketing, consuming, and
disposing of food and food-related items. It also includes
all the needed inputs and all generated outputs, e.g. water, technology, and food waste. Local food systems
are networks of food production and consumption operating wholly within a limited geographic area. They
reduce food transportation and increase trust and social connectedness between producers and consumers.
The more direct sales structure allows for farmers and producers to make more off their produce while
consumers pay similar prices as with traditional food sales. Meanwhile, reduced transportation distances
means less pollution and fossil fuel dependence. The city of Phoenix defines the geographic area of its local
food system to be Maricopa County.
The city’s Office of Environmental Programs (OEP), in partnership with the Maricopa County Food System
Coalition (MarCo), received a grant from the Gila River Indian Community to complete a regional Community
Food Assessment to understand the current state of the food system in Maricopa County. Major findings from
the assessment:
• Agriculture and food influence major social, health and economic problems, as well
as opportunities.
• Despite our agricultural capacity and national leadership, our food system is not working
for many people in Maricopa County, especially low-income, ethnic minorities, seniors,
and children.
• We face serious challenges in sustaining regional agriculture and community food, especially
with regards to land, water and relationships.
134
Development of 2025 Phoenix Food Action Plan
Phoenix has made a healthy food system a priority. In March 2020, Phoenix City Council supported this effort, and
approved the 2025 Phoenix Food Action Plan (2025 FAP) that outlines short term goals, strategies and actions to
achieve access to healthy food for everyone in Phoenix by 2050. As the actions outlined are implemented along
with the collection of new data, technology improvements and continued collaboration with stakeholders, OEP
expects to develop an updated plan in 2025-2026 that continues movement toward the 2050 goal.
PLAN DEVELOPMENT
OEP convened an interdepartmental food action team to understand existing food system work across
departments, to learn from external food system stakeholders, and to coordinate the development of a food action
plan. OEP prepared the plan with input from numerous organizations currently working on food system issues
and with community members. OEP staff also participated in various workshops and meetings hosted by others.
Additionally, a food survey was conducted through the website and at public events to gather input from residents.
The resulting data was used to establish priorities for goals, strategies, and recommended actions to be achieved
by 2025.
SOUTH PHOENIX FOOD ACTION PLAN DEVELOPMENT
The importance of understanding the food system at a neighborhood level, particularly areas that faced high rates
of food insecurity was important, which includes the South Phoenix and Maryvale areas. Through a grant received
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Local Foods, Local Places program, OEP was able to conduct a
two-day workshop in South Phoenix to identify challenges and opportunities for improving the food system in
the South Mountain Village Planning Area. Community outreach for this work was focused on engaging residents
that were most impacted by food insecurity and hunger, including low income populations and people of color. A
food-focused Community of Practice made up of women of color was initiated to develop a greater understanding
of food challenges and to establish collaborative relationships for making improvements. The results of the
Local Foods, Local Places workshop and community was a South Phoenix-specific Food Action Plan that details
recommended actions targeted for the unique and rich history of this geographic area. This place-based plan was
included in the city-wide plan and was approved by Phoenix City Council for implementation as well.
CONTINUING COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
Putting the goals and strategies into action is being done in partnership with stakeholders that contributed to the
plan with a deliberate focus on continuing the work with the South Phoenix and Maryvale Community of Practice.
Virtual workshops have taken place and are planned that focus on the continued understanding of challenges and
opportunities faced by those most impacted by food insecurity, trust-building, and collaboration on actions desired
by the community.
135
Food Deserts in Phoenix
(2016)
136
Local Government Leading the Way
FEEDING THE HUNGRY & BUILDING A RESILIENT LOCAL
FOOD SYSTEM DURING THE CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC
The impact of the Coronavirus pandemic from 2020 through 2021 was
felt strongly in the local food system. People already experiencing food
insecurity were now more at risk. Local farmers lost their usual markets,
particularly from the closure of restaurants. The fragility of the local
food system became evident with an urgency to develop a resilient food
system. Phoenix, through the CARES Act Emergency Food Assistance
funding that was made available to the city, an allocation of $2.6 million
was made available for the preparation and delivery of meals and
Community-Supported Agriculture-style food boxes to COVID19-impacted
individuals and families through two unique and innovative programs.
In partnership with trusted stakeholders, OEP developed the following
programs:
FUNDS TO FEED PROGRAM
The program provided funding for community and grassroots
organizations, nonprofits, and health centers to recognize and enhance
food delivery occurring in the community by the community. Using a
hyperlocal approach, 10 organizations were able to continue and expand
their work, create new partnerships, and even obtain additional funding
from other sources for their work. Equity was embedded in this program
through the inclusion of residents impacted by food insecurity and by
grassroots organization members to provide input and ideas on how to
effectively promote the program and how to design the grant application
and reporting requirements in a way that encouraged participation by
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color. This program was administered by
LISC Phoenix, a community development financial organization.
FEED PHOENIX PROGRAM
The program provided funding to local farmers, Community Supported
Agriculture (CSA), mobile markets, restaurants, caterers, and event
venues. Local produce was purchased from 12 farmers for use in meals
prepared by 45 local Phoenix restaurants, caterers, and event venues,
which are in turn delivered to 29 social service organizations serving
COVID-19 impacted individuals and families. The connections made
between locally produced food and restaurants and caterers continues
with many of the participating restaurants continuing to purchase
locally. Fostering further distribution channels happened with the use
of a food hub to serve as the distribution point between the farmer and
the purchaser. Healthy food was delivered to those in need and the food
system was made more resilient by establishing a connected, community
food network.
Additional funding is expected to be allocated from the American Rescue
Plan Act to continue and expand these programs.
137
KEY ACHIEVEMENT
Cleanup and reuse of 10 properties in food desert areas for healthy food.
Phoenix has recognized there is an opportunity to cleanup and redevelop brownfields that directly impact public
health through the reuse of these sites for food and healthcare assets To date, 10 properties have been cleaned
up and redeveloped as urban farms, community gardens, school gardens, farmer’s market, and a food hub. The
work was initiated as a result of award of a $400,000 community-wide brownfields assessment grant from the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in 2015. The Brownfields to Healthfields (B2H) project targets areas with
inadequate health care, food deserts, and designated infill incentive, neighborhood initiative, and redevelopment
areas. Focusing on these areas within Phoenix addresses sustainable and equitable development, in addition to
building upon existing brownfields efforts.
Additional project opportunities include:
• healthcare facilities, clinics (permanent and mobile),
• healthy food outlets: supermarkets, temporary food retailers, mobile markets, food hubs,
farmers markets,
• urban agriculture: aquaponics, hydroponics, controlled environment agriculture,
community supported agriculture, community and school gardens.
The impact of this project results in improved community health due to the elimination of exposure to hazardous
substances and creation of opportunities for improved access to healthcare and healthy foods, which positively
impacts environmental and health equity.
Phoenix Brownfields to Healthfields Initiative
Urban farmer and community gardeners at the Spaces of Opportunity Project,
Phoenix, AZ – A Brownfields to Healthfields Project
138
Education to more than 14,000 people living in communities facing
food insecurity, hunger, and lack of resources.
Phoenix Food Day and Healthfest is celebrated to inspire people to change the way we look at food. The “Get
Growing, Get Healthy, Get Real” themed event brings education and entertainment together to help people in
Phoenix and the region move towards a healthier future. The primary goal of the event is to bring education,
awareness, resources, and fun to those vulnerable to food insecurity and hunger by hosting the event within the
most-impacted communities that experience high rates of food insecurity, hunger, lack of healthy food outlets,
transportation challenges, and scarce resources.
Since 2013, Phoenix Food Day has educated more than 14,000 people, engaged 160+ partners, empowered
residents, and helped small businesses. The city initiated the event as a simple recognition of healthy eating for
city employees. Since that first event, it has evolved into a place for everyone to enjoy learning about growing
your own food, cooking healthier and with local, seasonal foods, and becoming aware of the benefits of good
nutrition, physical activity, and well-being in a family-friendly atmosphere.
139
The city is a founding member of the Maricopa County Food System
Coalition (MarCo) established in 2015. Several organizations focused
on improving the local food system gathered to explore the viability
of creating a food policy council/coalition for the region. The city’s
Office of Environmental Programs was eager to learn and listen to
stakeholders to better understand the challenges faced in providing
access to health food for everyone living in Phoenix. Coincidentally,
the two groups of stakeholders came together, and the city committed
to help create the coalition. The city continues to have a strong
relationship with MarCo and has successfully won a grant award to
complete a Community Food Assessment for Maricopa County, the
first of its kind. The data collected was integral to the city’s own Food
Action Plan and continues to provide valuable information to educate
others on the importance of an equitable, healthy, thriving, and
sustainable local food system.
Establishment of the Maricopa County
Food System Coalition
140
GOAL 1
TARGET 1
100%
57.5%
BASELINE
All people living in
Phoenix will have enough
to eat and have access to
affordable, healthy,
local, and culturally
appropriate food.
Incorporate agriculture, food processing, and distribution into
existing and future land use plans. Collaborate with key partners
to facilitate new opportunities for urban-scale gardens, farms,
gleaning, and distribution systems.
PlanPHX emphasizes the importance of residents having access to healthy
food and sets measures for access within a ¼-mile. Policies that are
supportive of food access should be integrated into future redevelopment,
transit-oriented, and other land use plans. Explore criteria for various
transportation, tree and shade, urban heat island and similar projects that
create safe and convenient connections between residential neighborhoods
and healthy food assets. Study the impacts of local food production on food
equity and social justice for low income communities.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Planning and Development
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS1.1 Pending Actions
Use existing financial resources for food production and
infrastructure. Pursue grants and other funding opportunities
that will enhance the community’s access to healthy foods.
Identify funding resources available through private sector, government,
and philanthropic sources. It is important to determine the viability of using
current funding mechanisms available from the city that can be used for
food system improvements. Collaborate with key partners to facilitate
new opportunities for urban-scale gardens, farms, gleaning, and
distribution systems.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Governmental, philanthropic and place-based funders
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS1.2 Pending Actions
141
Partner with schools and others to support and promote
education for youth and adults.
Support education and awareness on all aspects of the food system and
create opportunities to create or enhance urban agriculture, health and
nutrition education for youth, adults, and seniors. Collaborate with state
and county agencies working with school districts in Phoenix and support
Farm to Table programs in schools.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // City of Phoenix Youth & Education Office,
Phoenix School Districts, Nonprofits, community & grassroot organizations
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Promote existing healthy food assets, such as farmers markets,
grocery stores, retail, community gardens, farms, etc.
Focus on efforts to address challenges within communities with limited access
to fresh healthy food, followed by a city-wide approach to planning for food
access for all communities. Identify existing food and farm assets within
food desert areas, such as the South Phoenix and Maryvale communities.
Develop asset maps that are accessible by residents thought a variety
of communication tools, including online mapping, apps, social media
with written resources available at city libraries, community centers, and
recreations centers.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Community and Economic Development
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS1.3
LFS1.4
Ongoing Actions
Ongoing Actions
142
GOAL 2
TARGET 2
To be determined
To be determined
BASELINE
Businesses that produce,
process, distribute, and sell
local and healthy food will
be recognized as integral to
the economy and encouraged
to grow and thrive
in Phoenix.
Recognize food production as a highest and best use of land.
Phoenix has the potential to be an agricultural technology innovation hub,
with a focus on farming that is water efficient, restorative and adaptable
to the arid climate and high temperatures. Coordination with internal and
external economic development professionals will be done to evaluate the
economic development potential of the food system as a local industry
cluster. Create opportunities to connect food production businesses with
available land. Continue to collaborate with academic partners to establish
an agriculture technology initiative.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Community and Economic Development,
University of Arizona, Arizona State University
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS2.1 Pending Actions
Incorporate agriculture, food processing, and distribution into
existing and future economic development plans.
Assist agricultural entrepreneurs and existing food-related businesses and
identify financial and technical resources and the most effective means
to make those resources available. Develop comprehensive, user-friendly
information on the requirements of food production, processing, and
distribution businesses that is available from the city and through partners.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Municipal/Regional/State Economic Development
Organizations (EDOs)
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS2.2 Pending Actions
143
Establish a local food buying preference in future city contracts
and include in current Sustainable Purchasing Policy.
Develop appropriate contract language that can be incorporated into
city contracts for the purchase of local food. Coordination with internal
departments to develop guidelines and language, and potentially set
procurement goals. Provide healthy, local produce to city employees
through a Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) program and pilot
in downtown city facilities initiated. Explore the development of heathy
procurement guidelines for city events and facilities.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Finance
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Partner with stakeholders to support and promote a Buy Local
Food campaign.
Educate and engage residents on the benefits of purchasing locallyproduced food. Develop a Buy Local Food Campaign in collaboration
with partners, such as Local First Arizona Foundation and others.
Partnership opportunities with grocers to further promote Buy Local
will be established or enhanced.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Local First Arizona Foundation, MarCo, Local Food
Producers, Grocers
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS2.3
LFS2.4
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
144
GOAL 3
TARGET 3
To be determined
To be determined
BASELINE
Growing food in
Phoenix and the
region will be easy and
valued, for personal or
business use.
Update codes and ordinances where appropriate to
eliminate barriers and encourage developing a healthy
food infrastructure.
Existing zoning codes will be further clarified to clearly identify which
zoning classifications and requirements are needed for various agricultural
and food production uses, commercial and residential, including,
hydroponic, aquaponics, growing inside structures, and for burgeoning uses,
such as rooftop and building-integrated agriculture. Identify and update/
amend appropriate sections of the zoning code to clearly identify zoning
districts in which agricultural land uses are permitted. Develop definitions
for agricultural land uses. Develop streamlined processes for agricultural
zoning. Explore the development of an “Agritainment” zoning districts,
and zoning incentive models (density, PAD district, similar zoning options)
that encourages set asides of land for food production.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Planning and Development, local food producers,
and businesses
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS3.1 Pending Actions
Explore development of agriculture community land trusts and/or
preservation mechanisms.
Various mechanisms that could be used in concert with nonprofit and
private partnerships to preserve land for food production will be identified,
as well as best practices of other cities. Existing city policies impacting
agricultural land uses will be reviewed. Recommendations will be made for
new or modifications to existing policies.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Community and Economic, Real Estate, Water Services,
Planning and Development, MarCo, Arizona Community Land Trust
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS3.2 Pending Actions
145
Explore the use of city-owned parcels as opportunities for urban
agriculture, focused on food deserts within irrigation districts.
Develop, with city departments, guidelines on how to lease/buy city owned
land for food production, including establishing appropriate minimum length
of lease terms feasible for agriculture. Adopt policies allowing the use of park
land and other city-owned land, where feasible and appropriate, for food
production. An inventory of land potentially available for agricultural use will
be created, including Brownfields. Upon identification of available city-owned
land located in food desert and irrigation district areas, a Request for Proposal
for agricultural development may be issued.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Parks and Recreation, Public Works, Water Services,
Real Estate
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Support the growth of land uses that contribute to a healthy and
sustainable food system (i.e. grocery stores, community gardens,
urban farms and other urban agriculture elements).
In addition to city-owned land, there is the opportunity to support efforts to
expand urban food production on residential, commercial and institutional
properties. Support and encourage collaboration between public and private
sectors and small/medium sized farms, food-hubs, mobile markets, co-ops,
community and back-yard gardens. Establish community commercial kitchens
and/or use existing commercial kitchens. Explore opportunities to work with
vacant schools with kitchens to use as a training and economic development
resource will be performed.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Planning and Development, Community and Economic
Development, Greater Phoenix Economic Council, school districts
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS3.3
LFS3.4
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
146
Use existing and explore new job training resources,
where feasible, and partner with others to provide
training opportunities.
A cornerstone in a sustainable local food system is the development of career
pathways in farming. Support programs focused on training future farmers
and collaborate with partners and institutions, such as the University of
Arizona Cooperative Extension of Maricopa County. Identify other potential
partners with a focus on providing training for new farmers. Facilitate
business training programs for farmers to gain more marketing knowledge
and expertise. Explore city policies that support the creation of agricultural
employment training opportunities to further promote job creation in the
agriculture sector.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // City of Phoenix Workforce Development,
Maricopa Community Colleges, University of Arizona
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS3.5 Pending Actions
147
GOAL 4
TARGET 4
80%
To be determined
BASELINE
Food-related waste will
be prevented, reused, or
recycled via sustainable
food production practices
that maintain a healthy
environment.
Update codes and ordinances to clarify food waste diversion, i.e.,
composting opportunities.
Providing clear and understandable codes and ordinances to clarify food
waste diversion, such as composting, is essential to a thriving local food
system. This includes identifying and updating/amending appropriate
sections of the zoning code to clearly identify zoning requirements for
composting opportunities.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Planning and Development, Public Works,
MarCo, Business
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS4.1 Pending Actions
Support and promote methods to prevent edible food from
entering the waste stream.
A key factor in preventing food waste is to provide means for edible food
to be consumed. In the United States an estimated 30-40% of food goes
uneaten and ends up in landfills, further contributing to GHG emissions.
Creating opportunities to provide edible food to those that don’t have
enough to eat involves collaborating with stakeholders to identify solutions.
Opportunities for collaboration with other stakeholders involved in the
prevention of food waste and food rescue will be evaluated.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Public Works, MarCo, Waste Not,
restaurants, institutions
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS4.2 Pending Actions
148
Promote and support sustainable practices in all areas
of the food system.
The food economy is an integral contributor to the overall economic
vitality of the city. Business opportunities are varied, from agricultural
entrepreneurs, catering, restaurants, food trucks, mobile markets, retail, such
as neighborhood bodegas or convenience stores, and for backyard gardeners
to sell their produce. Identifying and providing business resources, including
water and energy efficiency, regenerative agricultural practices, and safe
food handling are keys to creating a sustainable food economy. Continue
working toward development of a Sustainable Food Economy Accelerator
for entrepreneurs. Identify mechanisms to assist food-related businesses,
including technical assistance and financial resources.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Community and Economic Development,
ASU, cities within Maricopa County
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS4.3 Pending Actions
149
GOAL 5
TARGET 5
To be determined
To be determined
BASELINE
Develop food policies and
actions that address local and
global challenges posed by
climate change, urbanization,
political and economic crises,
population growth and
other factors.
Research policies and actions that plan for future shocks
related to changing population growth, hazards, economic
conditions and climate.
Conduct research on best practices and explore ways to integrate food
system resiliency within existing and future hazard mitigation, emergency
response, and or resilience planning efforts. OEP would serve as the lead
for food systems in future resilience planning. Coordination with city
departments and external stakeholders will identify opportunities for food
system integration.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Stakeholders from within all aspects of
the local food system.
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS5.1 Pending Actions
Convene local food producers with city staff, leaders, and elected
officials to build trust and understanding.
Create opportunities and collaborate with stakeholders to identify solutions
for providing edible food to those that don’t have enough to eat.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Phoenix elected officials and city departments,
Local First Arizona Foundation, local food producers
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS5.2 Pending Actions
150
Explore funding opportunities from federal, state,
and philanthropic organizations for food system
activities and staff.
Identify and submit for funding opportunities from federal,
state, and philanthropic organizations for food system activities
and staff. Resources to conduct recommended actions will
be needed. Obtaining funding from all feasible and available
resources will be paramount to the success of achieving the goals,
strategies and actions identified.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // Potential funders
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Complete a GHG Emissions Inventory for the local food
system, defined as Maricopa County.
Complete a GHG emissions inventory of the local food system,
that is Maricopa County, to determine which reduction actions will
be necessary to reduce the GHG emissions from the production,
processing and delivery of food across Phoenix and the region.
CITY LEAD // Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // MarCo, University of Arizona, NRDC, ICLEI, ASU
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
LFS5.3
LFS5.4
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
151
HEAT
152
Goal H1: Create a network of 100 cool corridors in vulnerable
communities by 2030 to facilitate movement of people
walking, biking and using transit, particularly within and
connecting to Transit Oriented Development Districts, Village
Cores, and Centers.
Goal H2: Increase shade provided by trees or constructed
shade in ‘flatland parks’ (not preserves) and street rights-ofways to achieve a 25% tree and shade canopy in pedestrian
areas by 2030, prioritizing communities most vulnerable to
heat, particularly within and connecting to Transit Oriented
Development Districts, Village Cores, and Centers.
Goal H3: Provide resources and services to residents to
manage heat.
Goal H4: Increase the use of high albedo, or reflective,
materials in infrastructure projects.
Goal H5: Develop HeatReady certification for cities in
partnership with ASU by 2025.
2050
GOAL
Reduce urban heat-island effect
through green infrastructure as well
as doubling the current tree and shade
canopy to 25%. Have all residents
within a five-minute walk from a park
or open space by adding new parks
or open space in underserved areas,
adding 150 miles of paths, greenways,
and bikeways throughout the city, and
transforming an additional 150 miles of
canals into vibrant public space.
HEAT (H) GOALS
153
acres of desert parks
and mountain preserves
heat-related deaths
in 2020 in
Maricopa County63
heat-related Emergency
Room Visits in 2020 in
Maricopa County62
Parks
community and
recreation centers
tree and shade canopy
across the city by 2030
miles of trails and
40 trailheads
days over 100° F
(38° C) in 2020
41,000+
323
200
2,414 145
185
32
25%
11%
Diesel
154
Climate change is leading to increases in average temperatures and
increased possibilities of severe prolonged heat waves. Extreme heat
can have dangerous and deadly health consequences, including heat
stress, illness, and heatstroke.
Phoenix, situated in the northeastern Sonoran Desert, has developed
with heat as its signature and desert life as its core identity. On average,
Phoenix has 110 days each year with a high temperature over 100
degrees F and 19 days with high temperatures exceeding 110 degrees F.
July and August of 2020 were the hottest on record, and 2020 saw
53 days with temperatures over 110 degrees F and 145 days over
100 degrees F. Unlike many other U.S. cities that only have a small
percentage of homes with air conditioning, almost all dwellings in
Phoenix have some form of mechanical cooling making it, in some ways,
better prepared for heat waves and extreme heat events than many
other cities. However, in Phoenix, heat does not affect all residents
equally--outdoor workers, those experiencing homelessness, and other
vulnerable populations such as low-income residents living in poorly
insulated homes, face the brunt of the impacts related to heat. Heat
is responsible for more fatalities in the U.S. each year than all other
weather-related disasters combined. 2,414 heat-related emergency
room visits and over 300 heat-related deaths occurred in Maricopa
County in 2020. If all the annual heat-related deaths in Phoenix
happened at once, it would qualify as a natural disaster.
And daytime extreme heat is not the only concern. Over the last 20
years, the average night-time temperature in Phoenix has risen by
nine degrees as a result of the urban heat island effect—a phenomena
caused by adding increasing amounts of hardscape and concrete
surfaces that capture and store heat during the day and then release
BACKGROUND
155
it more slowly in the evening hours than the surrounding desert. If
cooler materials were used in infrastructure, while trees, shade and
other forms of green infrastructure were added, the urban heat island
effect could be significantly mitigated. As an example, ASU tested two
neighborhoods in Phoenix just 2 miles apart, but one with significantly
more green infrastructure, that experienced a 13 degree F (7 degree C)
average surface temperature difference during peak summer
hours. The type of infrastructure influences the temperatures
communities experience.
Given its reputation as the hottest city in the nation, and its proximity
to ASU, Phoenix is without question the epicenter of research related
to heat. Hundreds of research projects conducted by ASU over the last
decade form a library of resources which could be used to inform future
action. In addition, the city of Phoenix and many other organizations
have been active in implementing programs and policies related to heat.
The MAG Heat Relief Network partners with 137 organizations that
provides water, respite, and wellness checks in communities alongside
an education and awareness campaign each summer focusing on
vulnerable communities. The Network is heralded as one of the best
heat-mitigating programs in the nation. The Neighborhood Services
Department works with utilities and others to invest millions of dollars
each year in weatherizing homes of low-income residents to reduce
cooling costs and protect residents from the effects of heat. A recent
inventory of actions by city departments found over 50 innovation pilot
programs and initiatives recently implemented by city Departments.
156
Maricopa Association of Governments Heat Relief Network (2020) showing resources to
manage heat, like the locations of cooling centers, hydration stations, and collection sites.
157
Local Government Leading the Way
OFFICE OF HEAT RESPONSE AND MITIGATION (OHRM)
In 2021, City Council approved the established of a new office to coordinate efforts
city-wide to address heat response, heat mitigation and oversee the implementation
of the Tree and Shade Masterplan. The new office includes a Heat Officer, a Shade
Administrator and Tree Administrator along with administrative support to track and
report on heat actions and coordinate the many actions already underway across
city departments and in the community. The office will work closely with ASU for
development of heat tracking tools and the city/ASU partnership on developing a
Heat Ready City Certification program.
The OHRM will track, coordinate and report on the following city programs:
TREE AND MASTER PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
The Tree and Shade Master Plan was approved by City Council in 2010 and had a
vision to double the tree and shade canopy by 2030 to 25%.64 Although many actions
were taken related to education and awareness campaigns and development of
resources, the number of trees planted in the early years was limited given the
context of the great economic recession. However, after a groundswell of community
support, City Council dedicated $450,000 in additional to tree funding leading to
4,000 trees now being planted annually on city streets, parks and rights of way.
The Tree and Shade Master Plan implementation is supported by over $5 million in
annual funding to city departments as part of a city-wide program that includes the
following initiatives:
In a 2017 survey
of residents, 92%
thought the goal
to double the tree
and shade canopy
was a good idea,
75% said they
would be willing
to participate
in community
planting projects
and over 50% said
they will be willing
to donate to a tree
campaign.
• The Urban Forestry Roundtable established in 2019 by the city of Phoenix, American Forests and
Arizona Sustainability Alliance, is represented by over 30 entities including non-profits, community
groups, and other city and county representatives united under the following vision: “Over the
next five years, we will work collaboratively to improve tree care and planting in Metro Phoenix
in ways that will measurably mitigate urban heat island, improve local air quality and prioritize
environmental and social justice outcomes through municipal and private investment in trees —
particularly in vulnerable neighborhoods currently lacking tree canopy.”
• The Urban Forest Implementation Team (UFIT) is a working group of city staff from all
departments to coordinate tree plantings efforts city wide and monitor progress toward the
goal to double the tree and shade canopy. Departments include Streets Transportation, Parks,
Neighborhood Services, Planning & Development, the Office of Sustainability, and the Office of
Environmental Programs. The programs represented by them include:
– The Citizen Forester Program provides training and education to volunteers to help in the
planting and care of trees in the community.
– Love Your Block is managed by the Neighborhood Services Department organizes community
planting events in neighborhoods and provides mini grants for neighborhood beautification.
– The Tree Donation Program, newly launched in 2021, will work with the residents and
businesses to fund specific tree planting projects in the community—particularly streets and
parks to create cool corridors in vulnerable communities.
158
– The Planning and Development Department’s Landscape Ordinance Text Amendment
will enhance the care and protection of trees and add enforcement of the ordinate to ensure
trees planted as part of new developments will be maintained and retained in perpetuity.
– The Parks and Recreation Department’s Tree planting program which is seeking to ensure
all city parks have a minimum 25% shade canopy. The Parks department seeks partnerships to
plant 1,500 trees each year in city parks.
– The Streets Transportation Department’s Tree Planting Program has dedicated funding
to plant an average of 1,000 trees per year in city streets supplemented by additional plantings
as part of Major Capital improvements. It also is launching a new “Cool Corridor Program” in
2021 to plant 9 miles of cool corridors each year, including a cool corridor in each council district.
The Cool Corridor Program will plant nine miles
of cool corridors each year—with a least one cool
corridor in each council district. Each corridor,
approximately one mile long will include up to 200
trees and other cooling assets such as structured
shade, to provide up to 60% shading for pedestrians
along each corridor. The program will prioritize
vulnerable neighborhoods, leverage GIS tools to
identify streets with the high pedestrian traffic,
and utilize the American Forests Tree Equity Score
Analyzer to ensure vulnerable neighborhoods achieve
a minimum “tree equity score” by 2030.
– The Environmental Quality & Sustainability Commission (EQSC) was appointed by City
Council to provide input on a wide range of environmental issues and has been highly engaged in
providing recommendations to Council, along with creating the Urban Heat Island and Tree and
Shade Sub-Committee (UHITS). UHITS focuses on addressing heat in Phoenix, by increasing tree
planting and developing metrics to track the progress towards the 2030 goal to double the tree
and shade canopy.
– The Memorandum of Understanding with American Forests hopes to achieve “Tree Equity”
where all of Phoenix’s neighborhoods will reach a minimal standard of tree canopy cover that
is feasible and appropriate for the city’s desert climate and conditions by 2030. Tree Equity is
the term American Forests trademarked to raise awareness about the need to address historic
disparities in tree canopy in cities throughout the United States.
159
This project more than doubled the size of a neighborhood park. The
work done in partnership between the Office of Arts and Culture and
Parks and Recreation Department enhanced it with artist-designed
sidewalks, fences, benches, gates, earth forms and other park
essentials. The earth forms feature an elevated grassy-berm and large,
oval playing area. Key park areas are shaded with such heritage trees
as oak, elm, pistache and mulgas.
Kuban Park
160
Heat Relief Network
In 2005, after a weeklong heat wave that resulted
in about 30 deaths in the homeless population,
the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG)
created the Heat Relief Network. The Heat Relief
Network is a regional partnership between MAG,
local municipalities, nonprofit organizations,
the faith-based community, and businesses.
Each year, MAG coordinates mapping of the
Heat Relief Network, a network of 137 partner
organizations that provides water, respite, and
wellness checks in communities alongside
an education and awareness campaign each
summer focusing on vulnerable communities.
During the summer of 2020, as the COVID-19
pandemic took hold, the Phoenix Convention
Center was used as a heat respite center
following public health guidelines. The Human
Services Department coordinated with multiple
city departments to provide individuals
experiencing homelessness with daily lunch
and dinner, on-site case management, medical
evaluations, and computer stations with access
to the internet. From May 29 through September
30, over 27,000 guests used the cooling center.
KEY ACHIEVEMENT
Mayor Kate Gallego speaking to a resident
taking respite at the Phoenix Convention
Center in Summer 2020.
161
GOAL 1
TARGET 1
100 miles
by 2030
0
BASELINE
Create a network of 100 cool
corridors in vulnerable communities
by 2030 to facilitate movement of
people walking, biking and using
transit, particularly within and
connecting to Transit Oriented
Development Districts, Village
Cores, and Centers.
Develop walkshed mapping tool to identify key pedestrian
corridors and priority routes for adding shade in vulnerable
neighborhoods and increase shade provided by trees or
constructed shade.
A next generation Walkshed mapping tool, based on the principles of
a model developed by Harvard students studying in Phoenix, is being
developed in partnership with ASU to identify key pedestrian corridors and
priority routes for adding shade in vulnerable neighborhoods. The tool
considers zero car households, proximity to schools, shopping and transit,
and identified the most likely routes or “walkshed” that pedestrians
would likely take in a given neighborhood. The tool is being piloted in
2021 and will be used to select corridors for implementing priority tree
and shade elements.
CITY LEAD // Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (New),
Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // ASU
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H1.1 Quickstart Actions
162
Heat-Ready City
Over the past two years, a significant effort has been undertaken by ASU, Harvard, city staff and other stakeholders
to better understand the potential for heat mitigation in Phoenix over the long term. Accelerated by a $100,000 grant
from Bloomberg Philanthropies, a “Heat-Ready” team was formed to pilot actions in the community, seek input from
residents and businesses on what it means to be heat ready, and explore a framework by which cities could evaluate
their heat preparedness using a soon-to-to-be-developed “Heat-Ready certification” system.
The efforts resulted in some remarkable findings. Staff worked with Harvard Students to research the effect of heat
on transit ridership including making recommendations for an updated transit ridership propensity model. They
prototyped a “walkshed” tool that considers zero car households, proximity to schools, shopping and transit, and
identified the most likely routes or “walkshed” that that pedestrians would take in a given neighborhood. When used
citywide, this methodology is able to identify priority areas of investment for creating “cool corridors.”
As a next step for climate action related to heat, the city will undertake the development of an Urban Heat Mitigation
and Adaptation Plan along with a corresponding Action Plan that incorporates many of the projects already
underway. Below are the top actions to be undertaken in 2021 and 2022:
• A Heat-Ready Certification Model is being developed by ASU and currently being testing by the city of Phoenix.
It will evaluate the policies, programs and governance structures related to heat mitigation and adaption and
inform the core components needed in the overarching mitigation and adaptation plan.
• Cool Pavement Testing is currently underway in eight Phoenix neighborhoods throughout the city and
one city park to receive cool pavement treatment as part of a pilot project. Cool pavement is lighter in color
than traditional asphalt or other seal coatings—reflecting rather than retaining heat, and reducing nighttime
temperatures in Phoenix. Details on the program can be found at www.Phoenix.gov/streets/coolpavement
• A next generation Walkshed mapping tool, based on the principle of the Harvard model, is being developed
in partnership with ASU to identify key pedestrian corridors and priority routes for adding shade in vulnerable
neighborhoods. The tool is being piloted in 2021 and will be used to select corridors for implementing priority tree
and shade elements.
• Expand the current Summer Safety program, which includes education and outreach to the community. Continue
to collaborate with regional partners (AZ Heat Preparedness & Resilience Workgroup) and associated action teams
(the Cooling Center Sub-Working Group and the Cooling Center Response Network).
• Formation and mandate of the new Office of Heat Response & Mitigation as approved in the 2021-2022 budget.
The office will be central to coordinated heat action across all departments.
163
Update Phoenix’s Walkable Urban Code to include additional
heat mitigation standards.
The Walkable Urban Code is applicable to and regulates some development
within Transit Oriented Development Districts and in proximity to high
capacity transit. Additional heat mitigation standards are being considered to
be included in the code, along with the current shade requirements.
CITY LEAD // Planning and Development
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
Achieve “Tree Equity” where all of Phoenix’s neighborhoods will
reach a minimal standard of tree canopy cover that is feasible and
appropriate for the city’s desert climate and conditions by 2030.
A new MOU with American Forests signed in 2021 hopes to achieve “Tree
Equity” where all of Phoenix’s neighborhoods will reach a minimal standard of
tree canopy cover that is feasible and appropriate for the city’s desert climate
and conditions by 2030. Tree Equity is the term American Forests trademarked
to raise awareness about the need to address historic disparities in tree
canopy in cities throughout the United States. The current Tree Equity Score
for each neighborhood can be viewed at treeequityscore.org
CITY LEAD // Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (New),
Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // Street Transportation
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
H1.2
H1.3
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
164
GOAL 2
TARGET 2
25%
11-13%64
BASELINE
Increase shade provided by trees or
constructed shade in ‘flatland parks’
(not preserves) and street rights-of-ways
to achieve a 25% tree and shade canopy
in pedestrian areas by 2030, prioritizing
communities most vulnerable to heat,
particularly within and connecting to
Transit Oriented Development
Districts, Village Cores,
and Centers.
Educate city staff on proper tree care, including
Right Tree, Right Place training, and the use of tall pots
to help establish plants.
Increasing the tree canopy of the urban forest requires that the right
trees are planted in the right place for long-term growth. Recently, in
order to increase the success rate of planting, a method was piloted to
use tall pots to increase the number of plants that survive.
CITY LEAD // Parks and Recreation
PARTNERSHIPS // Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (New),
Street Transportation, Office of Sustainability, AmeriCorps VISTA
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H2.1 Ongoing Actions
Update city’s tree inventory by 2023.
The 2021 Budget approved funding for updating the city’s tree
inventory—where every tree in parks, streets and rights of way will be
inventoried. A contract will be issued to measure and report on tree
information including the identification of lost and unhealthy trees.
Using TreeKeeper software, trees will be tracked as they are planted
and removed, along with the estimated value of the trees and their
associated environmental benefits.
CITY LEAD // Parks and Recreation
PARTNERSHIPS // TreeKeeper, Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (New)
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H2.2 Ongoing Actions
165
The outdoor public art project was designed to enhance the connection
between Harmon Library and the surrounding community by creating a
new park with artist-designed paths embedded with colorful glass; new
bright blue, leaf-shaped benches; artist designed garden fence; and shade
trees. Paths lead to a community garden and a grassy amphitheater that
will be used by the Harmon Library as an outdoor classroom. The paths
and the new ballpark are designed with dusk-to-dawn lighting.
River of Shade
Implement Project sunBLOCK, which includes permanent and temporary
public art microclimates.
Project sunBLOCK is composed of permanent and temporary public art microclimates
that lower the intense heat confronting pedestrians along key corridors in two of Central
Phoenix’s hottest neighborhoods by 2023. The project brings community, artists,
designers and environmental specialists together to create designs that both visually
and physically cool transit stops and surrounding streetscapes.
CITY LEAD // Arts and Culture
PARTNERSHIPS // National Endowment for the Arts, Public Transit, Street
Transportation, Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (New)
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H2.3 Ongoing Actions
166
Continue to implement the Tree and Shade Master Plan
to establish 25% tree and shade canopy in streets and
pedestrian areas by 2030.
The Tree and Shade Master Plan launched in 2010 with a vision to double
the tree and shade canopy by 2030. The Tree and Shade Master Plan
implementation is supported by over $5 million in annual funding to city
departments as part of a city-wide program with over 4,000 trees now
being planted annually on city streets, parks and rights of way. This goal
is further supported by the tree planting as part of the cool corridors with
an additional 1,800 trees per year and an additional 1,000 trees per year
through public donations for a total anticipated tree planting of
6800 trees annually.
CITY LEAD // Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (New), Street
Transportation, Parks and Recreation
PARTNERSHIPS // Office of Sustainability, Planning and Development
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
Increase tree and shade canopy of flatland parks by 25% by 2020.
(Preserves are not considered flatland parks.)
The Parks and Recreation Department has set a goal to plant 1,500 trees
annually. As of summer 2020, 131 out of 160 flatland parks currently meet
the 25% canopy coverage.
CITY LEAD // Parks and Recreation
PARTNERSHIPS // Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (New)
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
H2.4
H2.5
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
167
Increase shade at public transit stops in the city.
An overarching goal of the T2050 plan was to provide all residents in the city with
accessible transit and build ridership. Within that goal is the element to provide
shade at all 4,050 bus stops in the city. Currently, 2,680 of those bus stops have
constructed shade structures.
CITY LEAD // Public Transit
PARTNERSHIPS // Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (New)
TIMEFRAME // Medium term
H2.6 Pending Actions
Provide shade at all 4,050 public transit bus stops.
Over half of these stops (2,680) already have constructed
shade structures.
Bus Shade Shelters
Bus Shade Shelters designed in collaboration
with the Office of Arts and Culture.
Bus Shade Shelter co-designed by city of Phoenix
and Arizona State University to provide more
effective shade throughout the day.
168
Coordinate and track the planting of trees to achieve the
25% tree and shade canopy goal.
At the direction of the Phoenix City Council, the Environmental Quality and
Sustainability Commission (EQSC) created the Urban Heat Island/Tree and
Shade Subcommittee (UHITS) with the purpose to evaluate, analyze and
recommend policies to address the issues surrounding Urban Heat and
to advance implementation of the Phoenix Tree and Shade Master Plan.
Input and recommendations from the sub-committee will be provided to
the EQSC for approval and then passed on to City Council.
CITY LEAD // Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (New),
Office of Environmental Programs, Office of Sustainability
PARTNERSHIPS // Environmental Quality and
Sustainability Commission
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H2.7 Pending Actions
169
On April 30, 2021, Mayor Kate Gallego signed the National
Wildlife Federation’s Mayor’s Monarch Pledge. This act
pledges the city to commit to at least three actions per year
to support the monarch butterfly population. The western
population of the monarch butterfly has declined 99% over
the last 25 years from approximately 1.2 million in 1997 to
less than 2,000 in 2020. The species completes up to a 3,000-
mile migration each year and Phoenix is on the route. The
monarch starts returning through Arizona in September on
the way to overwintering grounds in Mexico and California
and passes again through Arizona during the spring migration
to the north. This makes Phoenix particularly important as
providers of the breeding and food sources they need to
make their multi-generational migration. Native Sonoran
Desert plants play a critical role in this habitat, particularly
native milkweed species and native nectar-producing plants.
The city is developing internal plans to expand monarch
butterfly migration habitat on city property and will also
be reaching out to the community. In addition to growing
a web of habitat resources for this key pollinator, these
efforts will provide multiple benefits, including increasing
overall native plant biodiversity in the city, supporting other
native pollinators and wildlife, increasing greenspaces,
and prioritizing and promoting low water use plants, an
important consideration in our desert ecosystem.
Monarch Butterflies
Photograph by William Vann
170
GOAL 3
TARGET 3
To be determined
50+
BASELINE
Provide resources and
services to residents to
manage heat.
Educate the community on proper planting and care for trees
through the Citizen Forester Program.
Increasing the tree canopy throughout the city will require community
participation. Education on how to properly plant and care for trees is
provided through the Citizen Forester program. Citizen Foresters advocate
for trees by promoting best practices regarding proper tree planting and
maintenance techniques, while supporting community efforts to achieve
tree and shade canopy goals. Residents can become certified as Citizen
Foresters and assist in the planting and care of the urban forest.
CITY LEAD // Parks and Recreation
PARTNERSHIPS // Street Transportation, Office of Sustainability,
AmeriCorps VISTA, Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (new)
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H3.1 Ongoing Actions
Continue to participate in the Heat Relief Regional Network.
The Heat Relief Regional Network is a regional partnership of the Maricopa
Association of Governments (MAG), municipalities, nonprofit organizations,
the faith-based community, and businesses. The Heat Relief Regional
Network works with 137 partner organizations to provide water, resources
and wellness checks in communities alongside an education and awareness
campaign each summer focusing on vulnerable communities. The number
of heat related deaths in the county has risen in each of the last four years
with 323 heat-related deaths in 2020.
CITY LEAD // Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (new), All Departments
PARTNERSHIPS // MAG
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H3.2 Ongoing Actions
171
GOAL 4
TARGET 4
To be determined
To be determined
BASELINE
Increase the use
of high albedo,
or reflective, materials
in infrastructure
projects.
Continue to implement the Cool (Energy Star) Roofs
on city-owned buildings.
Coating the roof reduces the amount of energy needed to cool the building,
reducing GHG emissions. Cool (Energy Star) Roofs is the standard for all
departments that work with the Public Works Department (PWD) to handle
their roof replacement, as well as for those buildings owned by PWD. This type
of roof has been implemented for PWD owned buildings since 2005.
CITY LEAD // Public Works
PARTNERSHIPS // Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (new)
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H4.1 Ongoing Actions
Complete cool pavement pilot program and expand program to
areas where it would be most effective.
A Cool Pavement pilot is currently underway in eight Phoenix neighborhoods
and one city park. Phoenix wants to test the cool pavement material to see
whether it is effective at reducing temperatures in Phoenix desert climate. A
second project was initiated in 2021 in four neighborhoods, all proximal to
one another, to test the effective of varying types of cool pavement. Research
will continue through 2025.
CITY LEAD // Street Transportation
PARTNERSHIPS // Office of Sustainability, ASU, Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (new)
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H4.2 Pending Actions
172
Be a living laboratory to test cool materials for use in
Infrastructure projects.
Be a living laboratory to test new materials that could mitigate urban heat
island when implemented at scale. Many promising materials are coming
on the market yet their performance in high temperature conditions, their
durability and the overall economics need further study. For example, ASU is
currently evaluating a new material from 3M that reflects heat as long wave
radiation while cooling the underlying surface. ASU is also testing various
coatings as part of the overall cool pavement analysis—installing temperature
sensors below the pavement surface and at grade.
CITY LEAD // Street Transportation, Office of Sustainability,
Office of Heat Response and Mitigation (new)
PARTNERSHIPS // ASU
TIMEFRAME // Medium Term
H4.3 Pending Actions
173
GOAL 5
TARGET 5
Heat Ready
Certification
None
BASELINE
Develop HeatReady
certification for cities in
partnership with ASU
by 2025.
Pilot HeatReady certification in partnership with ASU.
Where more than 2,000 cities, including Phoenix, have achieved
“StormReady” certification by the National Weather Service, ASU in
partnership with the city are seeking to pilot a HeatReady certification
program—identifying the policies, programs and governance framework
and scorecard to assist cities in preparing for increasing temperatures
and heat waves. With Phoenix being the epicenter of research related
to heat and a hotbed of heat-related programs, ASU and the city are
seeking to develop HeatReady to allow it to become a national or
international certification program.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability, Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (new)
PARTNERSHIPS // ASU
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H5.1 Pending Actions
Expand HeatReady Certification nationally
or internationally.
After piloting and refining HeatReady Certification in Arizona, ASU and
the city are seeking to test HeatReady nationally and internationally to
increase its functionality and shared learnings and, more importantly,
its impact. C40 and the Global Cool Cities Alliance have both expressed
interest in becoming the global verification and certification body once
the certification tool reaches maturity.
CITY LEAD // Office of Sustainability, Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (new)
PARTNERSHIPS // ASU, C40, National Weather Service,
Global Cool Cities Alliance
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
H5.2 Pending Actions
174
WATER
175
Goal W1: Identify and implement infrastructure projects to
ensure water security.
Goal W2: Improve conservation of water resources by
improving stormwater management, optimizing water use,
conducting water audits, and utilizing wastewater.
Goal W3: Increase outreach and provide programs to
residents and businesses to reduce water use to 155 GPCD
by 2030.
2050
GOAL
Provide a clean and reliable 100-year
water supply.
WATER (W) GOALS
176
of water lines
Phoenix’s first water
pipeline was made out of
water supply
of wastewater recycled
water customers
7,000
MILES 89%
1.7
MILLION
REDWOOD
1OO YEAR
11%
Diesel
Phoenix Water Sources
Groundwater
2%
Reclaimed Water
51%
Salt River
Project
39%
Central
Arizona
Project
8%
177
The city’s Water Services Department (Phoenix Water) is more than 110
years old and is responsible for treating and distributing tap water to
1.7 million customers daily. It also manages the city’s sewer system and
handles wastewater treatment operations for 2.5 million residents in five
valley cities. Infrastructure includes 7,000 miles of water lines, 5,000 miles
of sewer lines, eight treatment plants, 50,000 fire hydrants, and 90,000
manholes. Phoenix’s water and sewer rates are among the lowest of
comparable-sized cities nationwide. Our tap water supply is secure due
to decades of planning and multiple water sources. The city reuses nearly
all its wastewater on crops, wetlands, and energy production. Moving
forward, the city’s water and wastewater utilities are committed to energy
efficiency that will pave the way to accomplishing their immediate, midterm, and future goals in sustainability and emission reductions. We are
taking action to increase water security and mitigate GHG emissions by
banking water, using wastewater, increasing renewable sources of energy
to power the water treatment processes, and capturing GHG emissions
from these processes.
Phoenix Water GHG emissions are generated by a variety of activities.
GHG emissions can occur from the combustion of purchased natural
gas, the consumption of purchased electricity, methane generation
during water treatment, and nitrous oxide emissions from wastewater
effluent. GHG emissions also occur during the hauling and regeneration
of granular activated carbon filters used in the treatment process to
remove disinfection byproducts. GHG emissions from Water Services
have decreased by 18.8% between 2005 and 2018 but have increased
by 2.8% since 2015.
BACKGROUND
178
10
10
10
17
17
17
60
101
153
202
202
143
303
30
W. DEER VALLEY RD.
CAREFREE HWY.
E. BELL RD.
W. CAMELBACK RD.
E. SHEA BLVD.
W. GLENDALE AVE.
E. LINCOLN DR.
BUCKEYE RD.
E. PECOS RD.
N. 32ND ST.
N. 35TH AVE.
N. 75TH AVE.
N. 51ST AVE.
N. EL MIRAGE RD.
S. 107TH AVE.
SCOTTSDALE RD.
24TH ST. WTP
LAKE PLEASANT WTP
ARIZONA CANAL
AR IZONA CANA L
CENTRAL ARIZONA
PROJECT CANAL
CENTRAL ARIZ ONA P R OJECT CANA L
UNION HILLS WTP
DEER VALLEY WTP
CAVE
BUTTES
PHOENIX
SONORAN
PRESERVE
COLORADO RIVER WATER
SALT AND VERDE RIVER WATER
CANALS
MOUNTAIN RANGES
WATER TREATMENT PLANTS
LEGEND
PHOENIX
MOUNTAINS
PRESERVES
179
Local Government Leading the Way
Water equity occurs when all communities have access to safe, clean, affordable drinking water and wastewater
services; have a role in decision-making processes related to water management in their communities; and share
in the economic, social, and environmental benefits of water systems. Water equity is undermined by longstanding
and pernicious root causes of societal inequality such as systemic and institutional racism and structural inequalities
in access to education, income and wealth, employment, housing, transportation, public safety, and other social
services. Between August of 2019 and June of 2020 the city of Phoenix Citizens’ Water/Wastewater Rate Advisory
Committee researched and discussed these issues as representatives of the broader community for the purpose
of determining where Phoenix Water Services stands on issues of water equity, and to see what additional actions
to take to promote water equity in the city of Phoenix. Recommendations from the Committee included testing
alternatives to water service disconnections, providing additional financial assistance, hiring additional customer
service agents that speak Spanish and explore the possibility of offering additional language services .65
While Phoenix Water enjoys a robust and diverse water portfolio, conservation has always been a part of the history
of Phoenix Water. Rather than focusing on short-term reactive strategies during drought conditions, Phoenix focuses
on long-term culture change among its residents. Residents are encouraged to adopt a desert lifestyle because, in
a desert, water will always be scarce. This strategy has been very successful as Phoenix has reduced the number
of gallons per capita per day (GPCD) it uses by nearly 30% over the last twenty years, despite an increase of almost
400,000 additional residents.
For over 100 years, Phoenix Water has delivered safe, reliable tap water to homes and businesses in our community.
Arizona is a leader in water banking, meaning water is stored underground to be used later. Arizona has banked
millions of acre-feet of water through the Arizona Water Banking Authority. Phoenix Water delivers renewable surface
water supplies to our customers so that groundwater can be saved for the future. Phoenix has worked hard to protect
local groundwater supplies so that they are available to protect against drought and a changing climate. Phoenix’s
efforts ensure that our underground reservoir of groundwater – water in the bank – is there when we need it.
In addition to ensuring a secure water supply, work has been done to rehabilitate natural habitats, like Tres Rios.
The Tres Rios Environmental Restoration project involves the rehabilitation of nearly 700 acres in and around
the Salt River, restoring a vital wetland and riparian habitat. The project creates a mutual relationship between the
renewed wetlands and the nearby wastewater treatment plant. The lush and scenic Tres Rios is now home to more
than 150 species of birds and animals like muskrats, raccoons, skunks, coyotes, bobcats, and beavers. The beautiful
cottonwood groves, willows, mesquites, and other desert shrubs around the reed-lined ponds and along the trail
attract many migratory and wintering songbirds. By bringing the Salt River back to the condition it was in during
the early 1800s, this project is repairing a natural habitat. The trees and plants produce hundreds of thousands of
volatile organic compounds including oxygen, a vital element to clean and healthy air. The reclaimed water from the
wastewater treatment plant is pumped over to the wetlands, and the plants and animals take what they need before
it is discharged back into the river. Nearly all of the reclaimed water generated in Phoenix is treated and reused for
agricultural irrigation, local power generation, groundwater recharge, and wetland restoration.
Tres Rios Wetlands
180
Sustainability Bond Sale for
Colorado River Resiliency Projects
On March 26, 2020, the city of Phoenix issued its first-ever sale
of Sustainability Bonds. The bonds will fund Colorado River
resiliency-related projects by the Water Services Department.
One of these resiliency projects includes building a pipeline
supplying North Phoenix residents (approximately 400,000
people) that are served exclusively by Colorado River water
treated at two water treatment plants. The proposed 66-inch
pipeline will be used to alleviate the effects of drought, by
ensuring that water supplies from the Salt and Verde Rivers
are available to North Phoenix during future shortage on the
Colorado River.
The Drought Pipeline is essential to the economic health and
vitality of Phoenix. This sustainability project will ensure all
residents have access to safe, reliable, clean drinking water
during the future times of shortage on the Colorado River.
The city of Phoenix Water Services Department is designing
additional infrastructure to continue its mission of providing a
reliable water supply to our 1.5 million customers. As part of the
city’s preparation for resiliency in a hotter and drier future, the improvements will provide
more flexibility to move Salt and Verde River water supplies to areas of the city that are
currently entirely dependent on Colorado River water.
KEY ACHIEVEMENT
181
GOAL 1
TARGET 1
To be determined
To be determined
BASELINE
Identify and
implement infrastructure
projects to ensure
water security.
Design and construct additional infrastructure to provide a
reliable water supply to 1.7 million customers.
The Drought Pipeline Project will provide Salt and Verde River water
supplies to areas of the city that are currently entirely dependent on
Colorado River water. The project is essential to the economic health and
vitality of Phoenix. This sustainability project will ensure all residents
have access to safe, reliable, clean drinking water during the future times
of shortage on the Colorado River. This project will be financed using
sustainability bonds, a result of the recent development of the Green
and Sustainability Bond Framework. This will result in loan service
cost savings.
CITY LEAD // Water Services
PARTNERSHIPS // Street Transportation, Finance
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
W1.1 Quickstart Actions
Continue to bank water, which is storing water underground
for use at a later date.
Arizona is a leader in water banking, the practice of storing water
underground to be used later. Millions of acre-feet of water have been
banked in Central Arizona aquifers through the Arizona Water Banking
Authority. The water that is delivered to residents comes from renewable
surface water supplies, so that groundwater can be saved for the future.
In addition, a water-sharing agreement with Tucson will continue, where
Phoenix will store some of its unused Colorado River water in aquifers in
Tucson. In times of shortage, Tucson will give Phoenix some of its Colorado
River water allocation in exchange for this stored water.
CITY LEAD // Water Services
PARTNERSHIPS // City of Tucson, Arizona Water Banking Authority
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
W1.2 Ongoing Actions
182
GOAL 2
TARGET 2
To be determined
To be determined
BASELINE
Improve conservation of
water resources by improving
stormwater management,
optimizing water use,
conducting water audits,
and utilizing
wastewater.
Improve stormwater drainage capacity and reduce backup
surging at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport.
Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, located at the end of the
Camelback Mountain south watershed, will improve stormwater
drainage efficiency by performing preventative maintenance that will
improve capacity and reduce backup surging preventing flooding and
contamination of the stormwater runoff.
CITY LEAD // Aviation
PARTNERSHIPS // Water Services, Finance
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
W2.1 Ongoing Actions
Identify and implement water saving measures on city of Phoenix
facilities and processes.
A city-wide Internal Water Efficiency Task Force was created to monitor
water used by municipal operations to identify and implement water saving
measures. As a result of the task force, water use dropped 46.5 million
gallons. On-going tracking of water usage in Parks and Aviation Departments
is possible by a GIS program developed by Water Services Department.
CITY LEAD // Water Services
PARTNERSHIPS // All Departments
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
W2.2 Ongoing Actions
183
Implement successful Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport
commercial cooling tower system upgrade program in other processes
throughout city of Phoenix and encourage commercial and industrial
adoption of process.
Cooling towers are one of Phoenix’s highest volume water uses. The Cooling Tower
System Upgrade was successfully completed reducing water use by 2o%. This cooling
water treatment system was also installed as part of the Terminal Modernization Project
and a system is now being installed in the Rental Car Center. Future opportunities are
being investigated for municipal operations and commercial use.
CITY LEAD // Aviation
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
W2.3 Pending Actions
Water used by cooling towers to remove heat from buildings can account
for as much as half of all water use in some commercial buildings in the
Southwest. At Sky Harbor Airport’s Terminal 4, the water meter that
provides make-up water for the cooling towers is one of Phoenix’s highest
volume water meters. A pilot project to install a system that softens
the make-up water increases the cycles of concentration and reduce
water use by 20%. Furthermore, using a mixed oxidant generator system
eliminates the use of harsh biocide chemicals that are both dangerous
and expensive. Initial estimates inferred that the water savings would be
10,000,000 gallons per year. It has been over two years since the project
was concluded, and the results are in with more than 21,000,000 gallons
of water and thousands of pounds of chemicals saved in 2019. The project
was so successful that the systems are now a standard central plant
design, and similar systems have been installed at the Terminal 3 Central
Plant and Rental Car Center Central Plant. The cost savings of these
upgrades are achieved by the elimination of purchasing biocide chemicals,
reduced water use, and increased system life. A principal factor of this
type of system is that it can be scaled up or down in size to accommodate
almost any size cooling tower.
Reducing water usage has saved power, which helps diminish the city’s
overall carbon footprint. These success stories benefit the Phoenicians and
the annual 46 million visitors (pre-pandemic) visitors that pass-through
Sky Harbor by keeping them cool and comfortable during their travels.
Cooling Towers
Cooling tower and associated
water-pretreatment equipment
located at Phoenix Sky Harbor
International Airport.
184
Implement the use of the Greater Phoenix Green
Infrastructure and Low Impact Development Details
for Alternative Stormwater Management.
The Greater Phoenix Green Infrastructure and Low Impact
Development Details for Alternative Stormwater Management is a
handbook that provides technical standard details and specifications
(TSDS) to be used for low impact development to members of the
design, planning and development communities in Maricopa County.
These TSDS will primarily be used on right of way projects and can
be implemented in private projects. Using the handbook will result
in environmental benefits, water conservation, urban heat reduction,
improvement in public health and additional green spaces.
CITY LEAD // Planning and Development, Water Services,
Office of Environmental Programs
PARTNERSHIPS // MAG, ADEQ, ASU
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
W2.4 Pending Actions
185
GOAL 3
TARGET 3
155 GPCD
by 2030
170 GPCD
BASELINE
Increase outreach and
provide programs to
residents and businesses
to reduce water use to
155 GPCD by 2030.
Expand existing SRP program that subsidizes cost of irrigation
controllers for residential use.
Water conservation has always been part of Phoenix’s strategy to maintain
a 100-year water supply. Residents are encouraged to adopt xeriscape
landscaping with efficient irrigation controllers through a program
that subsidizes the cost of smart irrigation controllers for residential
use. Expanding this program will reduce water use and lower costs for
residents.
CITY LEAD // Water Services
PARTNERSHIPS // SRP
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
W3.1 Pending Actions
Expand Toilet Retrofit Program to include a low-income program
and other incentives.
To conserve water, the feasibility of a new toilet retrofit program is being
evaluated. The elements that the program will contain are a low-income
program that includes toilet and professional installation at no cost to
customer and a flat rebate program to all customers that purchase and
install a low flow toilet that uses 1.28 gallons per flush.
CITY LEAD // Water Services
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
W3.2 Pending Actions
Phoenix has reduced the number of gallons
per capita per day (GPCD) it uses by nearly 30%
over the last twenty years, despite an increase
of almost 400,000 additional residents.
186
Expand the Homeowners Association Audit Program.
Homeowners Associations (HOA) use water to maintain common landscaped
areas, which can lead to high costs and high water usage to keep the areas
looking attractive. Up to 70% of water used by residents is for outdoor watering.
Phoenix piloted a HOA Audit Program that conducted nine audits of outdoor
water use within common areas managed by HOAs. Based on that pilot, the
potential average savings for the HOAs that volunteered to participate was
4.5 million gallons per year if they implemented the recommendations from
the audit. The program will be expanded from pilot to ongoing program by
increasing the number of inspections from nine to 40.
CITY LEAD // Water Services
PARTNERSHIPS //
TIMEFRAME // Short Term
W3.3 Pending Actions
187
1 Schwartz, J. (2021). U.S. Cities Are Vastly Undercounting Emissions, Researchers Find. The New York Times. https://
www.nytimes.com/2021/02/02/climate/cities-greenhouse-gas-emissions.html
2 Gurney, K.R., Liang, J., Roest, G. et al. Under-reporting of greenhouse gas emissions in U.S. cities. Nat Commun 12, 553
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-20871-0
3 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014). Assessment Report 5. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/
4 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014). Assessment Report 5 Topic 2 Future Climate Changes, Risks and
Impacts. https://ar5-syr.ipcc.ch/topic_futurechanges.php
5 U.S. Global Change Research Program. (2018). Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National
Climate Assessment, Volume II: Southwest Chapter [Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M.
Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. Stewart (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, 1515 pp.
https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/25/
6 James, I. (2021). Facing a Colorado River shortage, Arizona prepares for the pain of water cutbacks. Arizona Republic.
https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-environment/2021/04/30/arizona-preparing-cutbackscolorado-river-water-amid-drought/7401706002/
7 Maricopa County Department of Emergency Management. (2021). Maricopa County Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard
Mitigation Plan. https://www.maricopa.gov/DocumentCenter/View/68419/Maricopa-County-MJMHMP-2021_MJPTFinal-Draft_2021-04-23
8 C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group. (2018). C40 Cities Deadline 2020. https://www.c40.org/researches/
deadline-2020
9 C40 Cities. (2019). For cities by cities: Key Takeaways for City Decision Makers from the IPCC 1.5°C Report and Summary
for Urban Policymakers. https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/For-cities-by-cities-Key-Takeaways-for-CityDecision-Makers-from-the-IPCC-1-5-C-Report-and-Summary-for-Urban-Policymakers?language=en_US
10 C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group. (2016). Deadline 2020 – How Cities Will Meet the Paris Agreement. https://www.
c40.org/other/deadline_2020#:~:text=Deadline%202020%20is%20the%20first,Arup%2C%20the%20global%20
consultancy%20firm.
11 Arizona Public Service. (2020). Clean Energy. https://www.aps.com/en/About/Our-Company/
Clean-Energy#:~:text=In%20January%202020%2C%20we%20set,portfolio%20coming%20from%20
renewable%20energy.
12 Salt River Project. (2019). 2035 Sustainability Goals: Delivering today, shaping tomorrow. https://www.srpnet.com/
environment/sustainability/2035-goals.aspx
13 White House. (2021). Executive Order on Tackling Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-theclimate-crisis-at-home-and-abroad/
14 White House. (2021). Executive Order on Tackling Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad. https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-andabroad/
REFERENCES
188
15 Deloitte Insights. (2020). Electric Vehicles – Setting a Course for 2030. https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/
focus/future-of-mobility/electric-vehicle-trends-2030.html
16 Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Energy Association. (2019). Road Map to a US Hydrogen Economy. https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/53ab1feee4b0bef0179a1563/t/5e7ca9c03c2524311f3bef36/1585228227720/
Road+map+to+a+US+hydrogen+economy+Exec+Sum+Web+Final.pdf
17 Deloitte. (2020). Fueling the Future of Mobility: Hydrogen and fuel cell solutions for transportation Volume 1.
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/cn/Documents/finance/deloitte-cn-fueling-the-future-ofmobility-en-200101.pdf
18 White House. (2021). FACT SHEET: President Biden Announces Steps to Drive American Leadership Forward on
Clean Cars and Trucks. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/08/05/factsheet-president-biden-announces-steps-to-drive-american-leadership-forward-on-clean-cars-and-trucks/
19 Maricopa Association of Governments. (2020). Active Transportation Plan. https://azmag.gov/Portals/0/
Documents/MagContent/ATP-Plan.pdf
20 Maricopa Association of Governments. (2020). Travel Demand Model.
21 United States Environmental Protection Agency. (2019). U.S. National Recycling Goal. https://www.epa.gov/
americarecycles/us-national-recycling-goal
22 United States Environmental Protection Agency. (2015). United States 2030 Food Loss and Waste Reduction Goal.
https://www.epa.gov/sustainable-management-food/united-states-2030-food-loss-and-waste-reductiongoal
23 Arizona Corporation Commission. (2021). Arizona Utility Integrated Resource Plan Review. https://
docket.images.azcc.gov/E000015052.pdf?utm_source=Template+-+Commissioner+Peterson&utm_
medium=newsletter&utm_campaign=Peterson+Press+Release+8-12-21
24 Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Air Pollution Control Division. (2021). Climate Equity
Framework. https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wY19usrbJd3fXQkeEkX8V4reWE1pr5hzz4h_E0MFD08/edit
25 Inés Lockhart and Jeremy Doyle. (2020). C40 City Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting
Guidance. https://cdn.locomotive.works/sites/5ab410c8a2f42204838f797e/content_
entry5ab410fb74c4833febe6c81a/5f8f40cc25fb7d00ac5dec06/files/City_CAP_MER_Guidance_Final.
pdf?1621855171
26 Smith. P. Bustamante, M. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014). Assessment Report 5 Chapter 11
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU). https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/ipcc_wg3_
ar5_chapter11.pdf
27 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (1992). What is the Kyoto Protocol? https://unfccc.int/
kyoto_protocol
28 Texas Centers for Local Food. (2021). How can strong local and regional food economies strengthen our Texas
economy? https://texaslocalfood.org/economic-development/
29 C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group. (2018). Consumption-based GHG Emissions of C40 Cities. https://www.c40.
org/researches/consumption-based-emissions
30 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Center for Corporate Climate Leadership. (2021). GHG Inventory
Development Process and Guidance. https://www.epa.gov/climateleadership/ghg-inventory-developmentprocess-and-guidance
189
31 C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group. (n.d.). Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventory Development Workshop
Participant Handbook. https://cdn.locomotive.works/sites/5ab410c8a2f42204838f797e/content_
entry5ab410fb74c4833febe6c81a/5ae07f69a2f4220ae645dd8c/files/GHG_Emission_Inventory_Development_
Handbook.pdf?1578595728
32 CDP. (2021). Verification. https://www.cdp.net/en/guidance/verification
33 Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy. (2018). Global Convenant of mayors Common Reporting
Framework. https://www.globalcovenantofmayors.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/FINAL_Data-TWG_
Reporting-Framework_website_FINAL-13-Sept-2018_for-translation.pdf
34 Energy Insecurity and Public Health: Going Further through Cross-Sector Collaboration Workgroup. (2021). March 25,
2021 Virtual Meeting.
35 American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE). (2020). How High Are Your Energy Burdens? An
Assessment of National and Metropolitan Energy Burden across the United States. https://www.aceee.org/sites/
default/files/pdfs/u2006.pdf
36 City of Phoenix Human Services Department. (2019). 2019 Community Assessment. https://www.phoenix.
gov/humanservicessite/Documents/2018-2019%20City%20of%20Phoenix%20Community%20Needs%20
Assessment%20w%20Appendices-%20%28Final%29.pdf
37 U.S. Department of Energy. (n.d.). Energy Star Light Fixtures Replacement. https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/
articles/how-much-can-you-really-save-energy-efficient-improvements
38 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2021). eGRID Summary Tables 2019. https://www.epa.gov/sites/
production/files/2021-02/documents/egrid2019_summary_tables.pdf
39 City of Phoenix Street Transportation Department. (n.d.). LED Street Light Program. https://www.phoenix.gov/
streets/led
40 Google Project Sunroof. (n.d.). Estimated rooftop solar potential of Phoenix, AZ. https://www.google.com/get/
sunroof/data-explorer/place/ChIJy3mhUO0SK4cRrBtKNfjHaYw/#?overlay=flux
41 Savage, A. (2020). Phoenix Ranked Top City for Solar Power. Patch. https://patch.com/arizona/phoenix/phoenixranked-top-city-solar-power
42 U.S. Department of Energy’s Energy Information Administration. (2021). Arizona State Profile and Energy Estimates
Profile Analysis. https://www.eia.gov/state/analysis.php?sid=AZ
43 Terry. A.; City of Phoenix Water Services Department. (2017). City of Phoenix Lake Pleasant Solar Generation Facility.
2017 Better Buildings Summit Presentation. https://betterbuildingssolutioncenter.energy.gov/sites/default/
files/Renewable%20Energy%20Fuels%20Clean%20Water_Phoenix.pdf
44 Huizanhan Energy Machinery Co., LTD. (2020). Industrial HCFC Purity Refrigerant R22 For Air Conditioning Freon
Gas. http://www.hfcrefrigerant.com/sale-4842044-industrial-hcfc-purity-refrigerant-r22-for-air-conditioningfreon-gas.htm
45 California Air Resources Board. (2021). High-GWP Refrigerants. https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/resources/documents/
high-gwp-refrigerants#:~:text=What%20is%20Global%20Warming%20Potential%3F&text=The%20most%20
common%20refrigerant%20today,a%20ton%20of%20carbon%20dioxide.
46 C40 Cities. (2021). Cities and Unions Call to Action: A Climate Decade for Good Quality Jobs. https://docs.google.
com/document/d/16_yfnqTe4WBqu7fzOGu9K6hmCE88sDSl/edit
47 Wikipedia. (2021). Microgrid https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microgrid
190
48 Pratt, A. Flores-Espino, F. (2020). The Regulatory Path Forward for Networked Microgrids. https://www.tdworld.
com/distributed-energy-resources/article/21131999/the-regulatory-path-forward-for-networked-microgrids
49 Sonoran Studio Foundation. (2021). http://www.sonoranstudiofoundation.org/current-projects.html
50 Maricopa County Air Quality Department. (2019). Periodic Emissions Inventory Reports. https://www.maricopa.
gov/2652/Periodic-Emissions-Inventory-Reports
51 Arizona State University Rob and Melani Walton Sustainability Solutions Service. (2020). 2018 Community-Scale
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory. https://www.phoenix.gov/oepsite/Documents/2018-City_of_Phoenix_
Community_GHG_Report_FINAL.pdf
52 City of Phoenix. (n.d.) Phoenix Transportation 2050 Funding and Tax Revenue Distributions. https://www.phoenix.
gov/T2050/Funding
53 United States Census Bureau. (2019). Census Reporter Sex of Workers by Means of Transportation to
Work. https://censusreporter.org/data/table/?table=B08006&primary_geo_id=40000US69184&geo_
ids=40000US69184,01000US
54 U.S. Department of Energy. (2021). Alternative Fuels Data Center Electric Vehicle Charging Station Locations. https://
afdc.energy.gov/fuels/electricity_locations.html#/find/nearest?fuel=ELEC&location=phoenix&ev_levels=all
55 City of Phoenix Office of Arts and Culture. (2021). Little Canyon Trail. https://www.phoenix.gov/arts/public-artprogram/explore-the-collection/little-canyon-trail
56 City of Phoenix Street Transportation Department. (2021). Grand Canalscape Multi-Use Trail. https://www.phoenix.
gov/streets/grandcanalscape
57 Valley Metro Regional Public Transportation Authority. (2020). Electric Bus Study 2020.
58 Arizona State Senate. (2021). State Senate Bill 1108. https://www.azleg.gov/legtext/55leg/1R/fiscal/SB1108. DOCX.
pdf
59 Waste Today Magazine. (2017). Phoenix composting facility earns Envision Silver Verification. https://www.
wastetodaymagazine.com/article/phoenix-composting-facility-earns-envision-silver/
60 World Health Organization. (2021). Ambient (outdoor) pollution. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/ambient-(outdoor)-air-quality-and-health
61 U.S. EPA. (2021). NAAQS Table. https://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants/naaqs-table
62 Arizona Department of Health Services. (2021). Heat-Related Illness Emergency Department & Inpatient Admissions
(Hospitalizations) 2016-2020, Arizona Residents and Non-Residents. https://www.azdhs.gov/documents/
preparedness/epidemiology-disease-control/extreme-weather/pubs/heat-related-illness-emergencydepartment-and-inpatient-admissions-in-arizona-by-year.pdf
63 James, I. (2021). Heat killed a record number of people in Arizona last year, ‘a staggering increase’. Arizona Republic.
https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-environment/2021/01/31/heat-killed-record-numberpeople-arizona-last-year/4294654001/
64 City of Phoenix. (2010). Tree and Shade Master Plan. https://www.phoenix.gov/parkssite/Documents/PKS_
Forestry/PKS_Forestry_Tree_and_Shade_Master_Plan.pdf
65 City of Phoenix Water Services Department. (2020). Water Equity Initiative. https://www.phoenix.gov/
waterservicessite/MediaAssets/WSD%20Home%20Page/EquityPaper_2020-06-23_Final.pdf
191
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
SES1.1
SES1.2
SES1.3
SES1.4
SES1.5
SES1.6
SES1.7
The Montreal Protocol requires the U.S. to reduce its consumption of
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) by 99.5% necessitating that
equipment utilizing refrigerants be phased out. Approximately 300 of
900 HVAC units using this R-22 refrigerant have been replaced.
Use Energy Management Plans to identify opportunities to reduce
energy use and cost at city-owned facilities.
An energy management program (EMP) is developed for each city All Departments Short Term
building or process to support conservation and energy efficiency.
Contract with Partners to secure 250 MW of utility-scale
renewable energy projects, to offset or displace 100% of utility
provided electricity consumed in city operations by 2030.
Office of Sustainability
APS, SRP,
Renewable Energy
Providers
Medium Term
After lowering city operations energy use through energy conservation
and efficiency programs, and building on-site solar projects to the
extent practical, offset the remaining electricity used in city operations
through utility-scale renewable energy projects. These may be
developed by a range of procurement tools that assure financial
responsibility to our taxpayers, minimal financial and business risks to
city budgets and verifiable additionality of carbon reduction to city
operations.
Install solar energy generation systems at Aviation Department
properties, including Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport.
Aviation APS Long Term
Six MW of solar energy currently power the Phoenix’s Sky Harbor
Rental Car Center, several parking garages for the flying public, and
Aviation Headquarters at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport.
Additional arrays are planned for Terminal 4 and short-term parking
facilities, as well as for Aviation properties at remote sites.
GOAL SES1 Achieve net-zero GHG emissions for municipal operations electricity use by 2030 through
renewable energy projects, energy efficiency upgrades, and utility partnerships.
Quickstart Actions
Double the solar energy generation systems installed
on city-owned infrastructure adding 30 MW of new solar
capacity by 2030.
Office of Sustainability
All Departments,
renewable energy
developers, and
utilities
Long Term
The cost of solar photovoltaic systems has dropped 80% from 2010
costs. In most cases, solar rooftop, ground mount and carport arrays
now provide electricity at cost parity with utility company power. The city
energy team has developed over 40 behind-the-meter solar projects on
city properties, ranging from 3 kW to 5 MW.
Pending Actions
Ongoing Actions
Install solar energy generation systems on city
housing neighborhoods.
City housing developments will include solar power generation as part
of the APS Solar Communities Program. Solar installations will promote
equity in the distribution of resources to overburdened communities,
and will demonstrate our commitment to sustainability investments in all
of our communities.
Housing APS Short Term
Replace lighting in municipal operations with light emitting diodes
(LEDs) to reduce electricity consumption. Public Works, Convention
Center, Police, Information
Technology Services,
Water Services, Aviation
Replacing incandescent and fluorescent lighting in municipal Short Term
operations with LEDs results in lower electricity consumption and
longer lifetime of the device.
Replace heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)
equipment units to increase energy efficiency and phase out R-22
refrigerant.
Public Works Medium Term
STATIONARY ENERGY SECTOR (SES)
ACTIONS MATRIX - STATIONARY ENERGY
192
SES1.8
SES1.9
SES1.10
SES1.11
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
SES2.1
SES2.2
SES2.3
Replace with: Reduce energy consumption at city facilities by 30%
by 2030 (2012 baseline).
Office of Sustainability All Departments Medium Term
Electricity consumed by municipal operations of the City of Phoenix
totaled about 581,000,000 kWh in 2020, or about 5% of all electricity
used in the city limits. Services that consume that energy include
emergency response; neighborhood services, housing, elderly and
other community services; water treatment and delivery, and
wastewater treatment; aviation services at three airports; monitoring
and environmental services; convention and cultural facilities; and
support services. Energy consumption will be reduced by through
increased building and process efficiencies.
Emerging Technologies Program research on new and innovative
ways to save energy for municipal operations. Public Works Office of Sustainability Short Term
Investigate new and innovative ways that save energy by evaluating
technologies that reduce cooling loads in a facility.
Install solar energy generation systems at water and wastewater
treatment plants.
Water Services SunPower Corp. Long Term
In 2013, a 7.5 MW solar array was constructed at the Lake Pleasant
Water Treatment Plant (the renewable energy credits were sold). Water
treatment consumes very large quantities of electricity. The city's other
four water treatment plants and two wastewater treatment plants have
significant potential to host new solar.
Install solar energy generation systems at landfills.
Public Works APS Long Term
Landfills are potential candidates for placing large solar energy
generation systems. The SR-85 landfill has an existing 10 MW
solar field operated by Arizona Public Services (APS) and
other portions of the 2,650-acre landfill site are amenable to
additional solar projects.
Strongly advocate for distributed solar energy systems
(rooftop and carport solar) and for a cleaner electric grid,
with more utility-scale solar arrays.
Office of Government
Relations, Office of
Sustainability
Medium Term
Ongoing Actions
Provide services and products to enhance and promote the
provision of safe, efficient, sustainable and affordable residences
and neighborhoods.
Neighborhood Service
Non-Profits, Small
Businesses,
Community Partners
Short Term
Administer programs citywide that provide low- and moderate-income
Phoenix residents access to housing rehabilitation services for
homeowners and renters, which address emergency health and safety
concerns, stabilize critical systems, remediate lead hazards, and
improve energy efficiency; and preserve naturally occurring affordable
rental housing.
Pending Actions
GOAL SES2
Support energy-efficiency upgrades to existing buildings throughout the city by developing three new
community-wide conservation and renewable-energy programs including educational programs and
incentives to conserve energy by 2025.
Attract sustainable and inclusive businesses by developing
entrepreneurship and leadership programs to achieve 2050 goals.
Community and Economic
Development
Arizona State
University, Arizona
State Workforce
Board, Maricopa
County Community
College
Short Term
Create, launch and lead a new business attraction strategy designed
to recruit both national and international low and post-carbon
companies to the city of Phoenix. Develop an inclusive
entrepreneurship program that addresses the systemic barriers to
wealth generation and small business formation, serves communities
most impacted by the effects of climate change and supports and
promotes the growth of entrepreneurs and innovators developing
business models around climate action.
As a C40 City, Phoenix is a recognized leader in local and state efforts
to advocate for a cleaner grid and increased access to solar. With
direction from the Mayor and City Council, the city will work towards
increased sustainable policies and actions alongside utilities, financial
institutions, and policymakers at the local to national levels.
ACTIONS MATRIX - STATIONARY ENERGY
193
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
SES3.1
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
SES4.1
SES4.2
SES4.3
SES4.4
Develop embodied carbon calculators applicable to the Phoenix
climate and building materials used within the region.
Planning and Development Medium Term
Work with providers of embodied carbon calculators to develop
calculators applicable to our climate zone and to test those tools on a
sample of the building stock. These calculators can then be used to
determine which methods of construction can be used to lower GHG
impact.
APS Short Term
During the 23rd Ave Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) Power
Redundancy study, Phoenix partnered with APS to install a microgrid
that would serve both the city’s power redundancy needs and APS’s
long-term goals. Additional power redundancy studies will be conducted
at different facilities. Microgrids will be installed at those facilities
identified to show a benefit to the power redundancy needs at those
locations.
GOAL SES3
Promote development of community-wide energy projects, including microgrids, that improve the
sustainability and resilience of the surrounding community’s electricity grid.
Develop incentives and standards to foster private sector
developments that meet or exceed the Living Building Challenge,
Net Positive Design, or equivalent design standards by 2050.
Planning and Development All Departments Long Term
New incentives to foster private sector developments that meet or
exceed the Living Building Challenge, Net Positive Design, or
equivalent design standards, are necessary to spur innovation, create
showcase projects, and build capacity in the industry. Planning and
Development will work with industry to accelerate high-performance
building in the region. Phoenix is currently in the plan review stage for
construction of the city's first net-zero building in collaboration with the
Sonoran Studio.
Update zoning and other codes and streamline permitting
processes for green/sustainable construction and renewable
energy (solar) projects to reduce barriers for consumers.
Planning and Development Short Term
Updating zoning and other planning and development codes to
promote green/sustainable construction projects to match
internationally recognized sustainability codes. Currently, compliance
with the 2012 International Green Construction Code is voluntary. A
study of options for ordinances for electric vehicle charging stations and
associated infrastructure is being conducted. The city continues to
explore photovoltaic solar design software solutions that would ensure
code compliance, eliminate the need for plan review and reduce solar
permit processing time.
Design and construct all city of Phoenix municipal operations
facilities to Living Building Challenge, Net Positive Design, or
equivalent design standards by 2050.
Planning and Development Long Term
The Living Building Challenge is an international sustainable building
certification program that promotes the most advanced measurement of
sustainability in the built environment. On July 6, 2018, the Phoenix City
Council adopted the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code
(2018 IECC), which is a model code that establishes minimum design
and construction requirements for energy efficiency.
GOAL SES4
Design and construct all new buildings within the city to Living Building Challenge, Net-Positive Design, or
equivalent design standards by 2050.
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
Install microgrids in city-owned facilities that serve the city’s
redundancy needs and utilities long-term energy goals.
Water Services
ACTIONS MATRIX - STATIONARY ENERGY
194
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
SES5.1
SES5.2
Leverage the city's purchasing power to procure 100% renewable
electricity for municipal operations.
Office of Sustainability APS, SRP Long Term
Municipal operations are responsible for 3.8% of Phoenix’s total
GHG emissions from electricity use based on the 2018 GHG emissions
inventory. To demonstrate leadership, the city has committed to
procure 100% renewable electricity for municipal operations by 2030. In
2020, Phoenix began receiving electricity from SRP’s 10.7 MW Saint
Solar power plant in Coolidge, Arizona.
Pending Actions
Increase renewable and clean energy resources.
Office of Sustainability APS, SRP Long Term
APS and SRP are the utilities that serve Phoenix and the surrounding
areas. By 2030, APS set a goal to achieve a resource mix that is 65%
clean energy, with 45% coming from renewable energy by 2030. APS
has also announced a goal to deliver 100% clean, carbon-free
electricity by 2050. SRP set a goal to reduce the amount of carbon
dioxide emissions emitted per megawatt-hour by 62% from 2005 levels
by 2035 and by 90% by 2050.
GOAL SES5 Support policies and projects that help shape an electricity grid that is net-zero GHG emissions by 2050.
ACTIONS MATRIX - STATIONARY ENERGY
195
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
TS1.1
TS1.2
TS1.3
TS1.4
GOAL TS1
 Implement the city's Complete Streets Policy and Active Transportation program to encourage multiple
modes of transportation, particularly within and connecting to Transit Oriented Development Districts,
Village Cores and Centers.
TRANSPORTATION SECTOR (TS)
Ongoing Actions
Increase bike lane mileage in the city of Phoenix and ensure the
bicycle network is connected and comfortable for riders of all ages
and abilities.
Street Transportation Long Term
Bicycling promotes a healthy lifestyle and has significantly lower
emissions and requires much less infrastructure than a motor vehicle.
Phoenix City Council adopted the Comprehensive Bicycle Master Plan
in November 2014. This plan will help develop a comprehensive bicycle
network that is fully connected with the Phoenix community and other
transportation networks. There are 1,065 miles of bi-directional bike
lanes with a goal of 1,995 miles by 2050. In addition to the
Comprehensive Bicycle Master Plan, the T2050 Mobility Improvements
subprogram was established to improve neighborhood mobility through
the construction of new sidewalks and multi-modal connectivity through
the provision of new bicycle facilities.
Pending Actions
Support the development of communities that prioritize walking,
biking, and using transit as part of the city's ongoing Transit
Oriented Development efforts.
MAG Long Term
Create a network of multi-use paths along the existing
canal network in Phoenix.
The canal network is used to transport water throughout Phoenix and
provides an opportunity to incorporate alternative mobility
improvements along its banks. In 2020, Phoenix opened the initial 12
miles of shared use path along the Grand Canal in Central Phoenix
from Interstate 17 to the city of Tempe. This shared use path provides
safe and convenient walking and biking access between
neighborhoods, transit corridors, local employment, shopping,
education and recreation centers. The next segment began design in
late 2020 with implementation by late 2023. 45% of canals have paved
paths. By 2050, 90% of canals will have paved and connected paths,
with crossings at major streets or barriers.
Two city-wide initiatives, the Key Corridor Master Plan (KCMP) and
Active Transportation Plan, currently underway will help develop a more
robust bicycle and pedestrian network throughout the 15 villages in
Phoenix.
Planning and Development All Departments Long Term
Street Transportation ADOT, MAG, SRP Long Term
Develop a series of corridors with a strong emphasis
on active transportation and connections to high-capacity
transit corridors.
Street Transportation
Transit Oriented Development (TOD) is broadly defined as compact,
pedestrian-scaled, mixed use development strategically located within
a short walk of high capacity transit. TOD provides opportunities for
residential, business, and recreation spaces within walking distance of
public transit such as the light rail line. This close proximity reduces
commute times and the loss of productivity associated with traffic
congestion. The intent of TOD is to make walking, bicycling and using
transit convenient, safe and enjoyable for daily life. The total acreage of
expanded infill development within TOD areas is 403 acres. 707
affordable housing units have been developed within the TOD areas.
Over seven miles of bike lanes have been added to TOD areas. This
process establishes a new, transitoriented model for urban planning
and development along the city’s light rail system.
ACTIONS MATRIX - TRANSPORTATION
196
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
TS2.1
TS2.2
TS2.3
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
TS3.1
TS3.2
Office of Sustainability,
Planning and Development
APS, SRP,
Developers Short Term
Planning and Development staff will collaborate with building
organizations and other stakeholders to identify incentives and code
considerations and ensure all concerns are addressed and
incorporated into the building code adoption process. An EV Ready
Building Code Policy will be developed and incentives addressing EV
charging parking requirements for new multi-family and commercial
construction developments and connection requirements for new singlefamily construction to include information on conduit, wiring, and
electrical capacity. A strategy will be developed to streamline the
administrative process and decrease application timelines for
simplifying the city permitting process for property owners who wish to
install charging infrastructure on existing single-family, multi-family, and
commercial properties.
Ongoing Actions
All city of Phoenix fleet will be fueled by alternative fuels or GHG
net-zero fuels, including electricity.
Public Works, Public
Transit, Aviation, Police,
Fire
GOAL TS2 Increase the community-wide use of low carbon fuels (i.e., fuels other than gasoline and diesel).
Long Term
The city fleet will continue to transition to low carbon alternative fuels.
Currently, 73% of the fuel used by the fleet is powered by an alternative
fuel. Electric medium and heavy-duty vehicles, such as fire trucks,
street sweepers, buses, and refuse trucks are becoming available on
the market, providing for more alternative fuel vehicle options.
Hydrogen may also play a significant role as a fuel for medium-and
heavy-duty vehicles in the long term.
Advocate for state and local regulations that promote
alternative fuel sales in the Phoenix metropolitan area.
Office of Government
Relations ADEQ Short Term
Alternative fuels are fuels that are not gasoline or regular diesel.
These fuels are used in place of fossil fuels to decrease GHG
emissions. It is important to advocate for further local GHG emissions
reductions from state and local regulations that promote alternative fuel
sales in the Phoenix metropolitan area as directed by the Mayor and
City Council.
The majority of new garbage trucks will be replaced with
cleaner burning options such as compressed natural gas
(CNG) or electric as they become available.
Public Works Medium Term
As part of cleaner air initiatives, diesel-engine solid waste trucks
are being replaced with CNG-fueled ones, increasing air quality
and reducing GHG emissions. Nearly every new garbage truck is
powered by CNG and is slow filled overnight in the yard where they
are maintained. CNG fuel reduces emissions and particulates and
with overnight fueling saves employee time waiting in line to fuel
daily, further reducing emissions. By 2030, the majority of existing
garbage trucks will be replaced with cleaner burning alternative
fuel trucks. The Solid Waste Field Services division utilizes a fleet
of alternative fuel equipment to collect, reuse and recycle green
organics, and bulk trash from approximately 400,000 residential
customers each week and uses 100% alternative fuel, with 150 units
using CNG, and 60 of which use ultra-low NOx CNG engines.
Pending Actions
GOAL TS3
Rapidly accelerate electric vehicle (EV) adoption in the community and expand publicly accessible EV
charging infrastructure throughout the city to result in 50% of all vehicle sales being electric vehicles by
2030.
Quickstart Actions
Complete construction of the PHX Sky Train®.
The automated PHX Sky Train® connects travelers between the Valley
Metro Light Rail 44th Street and Washington stop and the airport. 1.9
miles have been completed with 2.5 additional miles scheduled for
completion by 2022.
Aviation Valley Metro Short Term
Increase EV Infrastructure development in single-family, multifamily and commercial properties through incentives and building
codes.
ACTIONS MATRIX - TRANSPORTATION
197
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
TS3.3
TS3.4
TS3.5
TS3.6
TS3.7
Replace the light-duty municipal internal combustion engine city
fleet with EVs where operationally feasible.
Public Works, Office of
Sustainability, Aviation,
Police, Fire
APS, SRP, Mayors
Climate Purchasing
Collaborative
Medium Term
An action team comprised of existing Fleet Managers and maintenance
staff will be formed to provide training and awareness raising of vehicle
makes and model opportunities that are available and forthcoming. A
Green Fleets Program and Procurement Policy will be developed by
2022 that will reflect how decisions will be made about vehicle
purchasing and replacement so that at each decision point,
consideration and analysis is given to purchasing a vehicle that would
reduce or eliminate carbon emissions. Update the centralized
procurement policy and/or process to enable the consideration of total
cost of ownership. Use vehicle lease-to-own programs, where
financially sound, in accordance with the Climate Mayor’s Purchasing
Collaborative to procure future EVs. Conduct pilot programs to include
medium to heavy duty fleet equipment (ex. transit buses, solid waste
trucks, and street sweepers).
Increase EV adoption by the public to achieve 50% of new car
sales to be EV by 2030.
Office of Sustainability APS, SRP, local auto
dealers Medium Term
Develop city incentive programs and strategies in partnership with
utilities and stakeholders to increase the new vehicle purchases of
PHEVs and BEVs market share from 2% to 50% by 2030. This target
goal is in direct alignment with the federal administration’s Executive
Order issued on August 5, 2021, to set a new EV target adoption date.
Coordinate with local auto dealers to develop programs and incentive
opportunities to include purchase and leasing options. Raise
awareness of the used car markets as viable purchasing options.
Increase EV charging infrastructure installations on city
managed/owned properties.
All Departments APS, SRP Medium Term
A citywide EV charging infrastructure plan and policy will be developed
for Phoenix that will include equity considerations when identifying
locations for EV charging accessible by the public, fleet and city
employees. A citywide EV charging infrastructure plan and policy will be
developed for Phoenix that will include equity considerations when
identifying locations for EV charging stations. Continue to seek out
funding opportunities to accelerate vehicle electrification and EV
charging infrastructure that may significantly defray the cost of both new
fleet vehicles and associated charging infrastructure.
Develop a strategy to expand eMobility access to overburdened
communities that have relatively fewer transportation resources and
options and that are impacted the most by climate change. Promote
inclusive collaboration to ensure all communities have a voice in
helping to shape EV policies and programs. Prioritize initiatives that
maximize benefits to vulnerable communities. Potential initiatives could
be related to rebates for members of income qualifying programs that
target the purchase of EV or EV charging stations, car-share programs,
micromobility incentives for e-bikes and e-scooters, or other clean
energy transportation solutions.
Develop community outreach and EV engagement campaign and
EV Roadmap Action Plan.
Office of Sustainability
Ongoing Actions
ASU, APS, SRP,
Local Auto Dealers Short Term
Engage regional businesses and EV stakeholder groups to advance
EV initiatives. Launch education and outreach campaigns to bring
awareness of EV benefits, costs, charging basics, and incentives
available to assist in promoting the advancement of EV adoption.
Create city staff EV team to act as internal EV advocacy and outreach
ambassadors to assist in informing Departments and
participating in EV events. Develop an equity-based EV Roadmap that
outlines the steps to achieve the 2030 EV goals.
Implement equity principles into EV policies and programs.
Office of Sustainability ASU, APS, SRP,
Local Auto Dealers Short Term
ACTIONS MATRIX - TRANSPORTATION
198
TS3.8
TS3.9
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
TS4.1
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
TS4.2
TS4.3
TS4.4
Short Term
The Solid Waste division employs routing efficiencies and utilizes
reciprocal agreements with private haulers and other municipal entities
to reduce trips and distance traveled hauling garbage to transfer
stations and landfill. These agreements provide economic value and
increased service efficiency for the solid waste operations. In addition,
the city is evaluating siting of new transfer stations to reduce emissions
and miles driven.
Install electric vehicle charging stations for nonroad equipment on
city of Phoenix Aviation properties.
Aviation Airlines, Maricopa
County Short Term
Using Voluntary Airport Low Emissions Program (VALE) grants, the
Aviation Department is developing electric ground support equipment
infrastructure at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport. Teaming with
the airlines, over 100 fuel-driven ground support equipment units have
been retired and replaced with electric units. Forty electric charging
stations have been installed and additional infrastructure will be
installed in future terminal construction projects.
Federal tax credits are available for some all-electric and plug-in
hybrids models. Policy support at the state and local levels is needed to
increase sales of electric vehicles and will be pursued as directed by
the Mayor and City Council. This includes developing ordinances for
electric vehicle charging infrastructure to support the adoption of
electric vehicles.
Pending Actions
Advocate for state and local regulations that incentivize that
new vehicle sales in the Phoenix metropolitan area be batteryelectric or plug-in electric vehicles, including electric vehicle
charging infrastructure.
Office of Government
Relations
GOAL TS4
Reduce the percentage of single occupant vehicle trips taken to 60% of all trips, through land use and
transportation investments that encourage walkable and transit oriented communities while maintaining a
thriving economy.
Street Transportation,
Valley Metro Long Term The bus service network is being expanded to include 75 miles of
bus rapid transit and corridors are being evaluated. Service hours
have been increased to match light rail operating hours, with
increased frequency on high-demand routes to every 15-minutes.
Street Transportation,
Valley Metro Long Term
Ongoing Actions
Increase the number of light rail miles in Phoenix by adding high
capacity corridors across the city as part of T2050.
Light rail corridors are being constructed to connect the city. Public Transit
42 miles of light rail will be added to the already existing
20 miles of light rail.
Quickstart Actions
Establish a policy that promotes teleworking for city of
Phoenix municipal operations.
Maricopa County Ordinance P-7 Travel Reduction Program requires a
reduction of the amount of travel performed in a single occupancy
vehicle by using alternative forms of travel. Teleworking is an important
element of a travel reduction plan and should be established for city of
Phoenix employees where possible. It is also important to incentivize
and promote teleworking for all employers, regardless of size. During
the pandemic, 25% of employees participated in the telework program.
An Ongoing Telework Program will be established to continue to allow
those positions to continue teleworking, when possible.
Human Resources
Department All Departments Short Term
Continuously evaluate routing efficiencies and reciprocal
agreements as applicable.
Public Works
Expand bus service network and service hours, and
introduce new bus rapid transit corridors as part of T2050.
Public Transit
Office of
Sustainability, MAG,
Maricopa County,
APS, SRP
Short Term
ACTIONS MATRIX - TRANSPORTATION
199
TS4.5
TS4.6
Transition to digital communications with residents, where
possible, without a decrease in the level of service provided.
A transition to digital communications will decrease GHG emissions by Communications Office Long Term eliminating the need for printed materials and their distribution. It is
important to consider residents who may not be able to receive
communications digitally.
Make job training for city of Phoenix employees available in a
digital format.
Human Resources
Department
Information
Technology Services
Department
Short Term
Providing job training in a digital format reduces GHG emissions. These
reductions may come from reduced amount of travel to a training
facility, reduction of space dedicated to training, and printing of training
materials. Using Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act funds, a learning management system is being developed
that will provide virtual learning opportunities with access to a large
database of training material that will reduce in-person facilitation of
training and reduced hard copy of training materials.
Pending Actions
ACTIONS MATRIX - TRANSPORTATION
200
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
WR1.1
WR1.2
WR1.3
WR1.4
WR1.5
Continue to implement reuse programs to eliminate waste by
reusing items previously identified as waste.
Public Works
WASTE AS A RESOURCE (WR)
GOAL WR1
Implement programs to reduce waste, increase the reuse, recycling and recovery of waste
materials and promote social and economic value.
Quickstart Actions
Continue to identify and collect waste materials to recycle.
Public Works Long Term
Programs are in place to recycle used fluorescent lamps, tires,
batteries and steel, which can generate revenue. In fiscal year 2019-
2020, 27,343 tires and 10,350 batteries were recycled. Approximately
1,100 tons of steel is recycled annually.
Waste materials are identified and collected for reuse. The Make Long Term
Ready program reuses auto parts reducing waste sent to the landfill
and saving over $120,000 in fiscal year 2019-2020.
Reuse recycled asphalt in street pavement pilot program.
Street Transportation Public Works, Arizona
State University Short Term
The Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) Project is assessing the cost
effectiveness and performance using different proportions of RAP on
Phoenix streets as part of traditional paving materials. Phase II was
recently completed, which involved performance tests on a road section
within the city. If the pilot is successful, this process will be applied on
many city streets.
Ongoing Actions
Continue to implement waste reduction programs at the two
material recovery facilities, including a composting facility that
recovers organic waste.
Public Works Long Term
Material recovery facilities (MRFs) are specialized facilities that receive,
separate, and prepare recyclable materials for sale. Phoenix has two
MRFs, one at the North Gateway Transfer Station and one at the 27th
Avenue Transfer Station. The city’s composting facility was opened in
2017 and is a key component of Reimagine Phoenix. Phoenix
processes roughly 169,000 tons of recyclables and 55,000 tons of
organic waste per year at these facilities.
Use the Adaptive Reuse Program to continue to assist with
streamlining the process and steps required to repurpose existing
buildings for new business uses.
Planning and Development Long Term
Repurposing existing buildings for new uses can be challenging.
Phoenix’s Adaptive Reuse Program encourages the reuse (recycling) of
buildings to promote business uses and offers incentives that help
bring life to underutilized buildings, supports local businesses, takes
advantage of existing infrastructure and supports our neighborhoods.
During the past five years, the city of Phoenix has assisted 151
qualified adaptive reuse projects by providing over $450,000 in
Adaptive Reuse Incentives.
ACTIONS MATRIX - WASTE AS A RESOURCE
201
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
WR2.1
WR2.2
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
WR3.1
WR3.2
WR3.3
Quickstart Actions
GOAL WR2
Reduce GHG emissions resulting from the degradation of waste by capturing landfill gas and converting
100% of the methane (up to 1,500 SCFM) from the SR 85 landfill into renewable natural gas as a substitute
for fossil natural gas. Have contract executed and facility constructed and operational by March 2023.
Continue to utilize methane capture systems on active and
decommissioned landfills to oxidize methane that is produced
to reduce GHG emissions potential.
Public Works Short Term Landfill gas capture systems are utilized at SR-85, the city’s only active
landfill, and decommissioned landfills, including Skunk Creek, 27th
Avenue, Deer Valley, 19th Avenue, and Del Rio landfills. These
systems capture methane gas that is produced by decomposing waste
and is combusted to produce a less GHG intensive gas.
Public Works Short Term
State Route 85 (SR-85) Landfill is Phoenix’s only active landfill and
receives over one million tons of waste per year from Phoenix and
other sources. The waste decomposes and produces landfill gas that is
roughly half methane and half carbon dioxide. A project will be
developed in the future to capture the landfill gas and use it as fuel.
Capture and reuse methane as vehicle fuel as part of the Landfill
Gas Recovery Project at SR-85 Landfill.
Ongoing Actions
Short Term
The Zero Waste team provides education on proper recycling, including
group tours of the city’s North Gateway Transfer Station and MRF,
educational presentations to schools, neighborhood and community
meetings, and hosting informational booths at community events. In
2019, the Public Works Zero Waste team interacted with approximately
23,500 community members. In 2020, the Zero Waste team extended
its reach through digital efforts including the creation of Recycle+, the
transition to virtual presentations, and the development of more online
resource documents. These digital practices will continue to provide
residents
additional access to the team.
GOAL WR3 Increase waste-diversion participation by all residents and businesses.
Ongoing Actions
The Green Business Leader (GBL) program started in 2017 as part of
the Reimagine Phoenix initiative to create public-private partnerships to
further waste diversion in the city. In 2019, the GBL program expanded
to recognize businesses for efforts around water conservation, energy
efficiency and sustainable purchasing, in addition to waste diversion.
There are more than 100 certified Green Businesses.
Provide outreach and feedback to residents what can
and cannot be recycled through presentations to schools
and communities.
Public Works
Pending Actions
Increase organic diversion from the landfill.
Public Works Short Term
Waste diversion efforts include diversion of organic materials. Through
the Green Organics Residential Collection program, organic material,
like yard trimmings, untreated wood, tree fruit, and cactus, is collected
from residential properties. Additional material is collected directly by
the transfer stations. Program goals include establishing value in the
local compost market by manufacturing a high-quality compost,
reducing environmental and climate impacts from landfilling, and
creating more community awareness around organic commodities and
waste.
Increase number of businesses that participate in the Phoenix
Green Business Leader Program that recognizes Phoenix
businesses that have sustainable practices, including increased
waste diversion.
Public Works
Office of
Sustainability, Office
of Environmental
Programs, Water
Services
Short Term
ACTIONS MATRIX - WASTE AS A RESOURCE
202
WR3.4
WR3.5
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
WR4.1
WR4.2
WR4.3
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
WR5.1
Update Sustainable Purchasing Policy to be applicable city-wide in
future city contracts.
Office of Environmental
Programs Finance Short Term
The Sustainable Purchasing Policy was created to integrate contract
provisions for more sustainable products and services and to consider
the best value considering price, performance, and environmental
characteristics over the lifecycle of the product or service. Currently,
special terms and conditions exist for the Office of Environmental
Programs regarding air quality, energy star/energy efficiency,
environmentally-preferred products, hazardous materials, recovered
materials, etc. These terms and conditions need to be updated to
reflect current city environmental policy and then rolled-out citywide to
procurement templates, barring conflicts with already existing
regulations, so all departments and their respective vendors can more
readily select, incorporate, and enforce them when applicable to their
solicitations.
Increase the number of existing buildings that are repurposed
instead of demolished.
Planning and Development Long Term
In addition to reuse of materials, it is important to reuse buildings
through the Adaptive Reuse Ordinance where existing buildings are
repurposed. There are eleven adaptive reuse projects underway in
Eastlake-Garfield, four in Midtown, nine in Uptown, and two in Gateway.
The Rio Reimagined Project encompasses more than 78,000 acres
and 1,189 potential brownfields. Cleaning up and reuse of these
properties brings community, economic, and environmental benefits.
The Rio Salado, Agua Fria and Gila Rivers will be revitalized by
reconnecting the community with the river and be a catalyst for
economic growth. Utilize resources obtained through a U.S. EPA grants
to conduct environmental assessments and cleanup.
GOAL WR5 Expand brownfield redevelopment along the Rio Salado in Phoenix.
Pending Actions
Office of Environmental
Programs, Community and
Economic Development
U.S. EPA, ADEQ,
ASU, Cities of
Avondale, Buckeye,
Mesa, and Tempe
Medium Term
Increase the cleanup and redevelopment of brownfields in
the Rio Reimagined Project area.
GOAL WR4 Transition to green alternatives from environmentally hazardous materials.
Short Term
Ongoing Actions
City Clerk State of Arizona Short Term
Volatile organic compounds are chemicals that evaporate quickly and
are precursors to ozone. One way to limit their use is to transition to
vegetable-based inks that are formulated to minimize and, in some
cases, eliminate the use of volatile organic compounds as much as
possible. The City Clerk Department Print Services Section currently
uses vegetable-based inks.
To decrease the production of waste from paper-based transactions
and communications, digital communications will replace
paper-based communications. If paper is still necessary, the paper
that is used should contain recycled content. City operations has
recently transitioned to the use of 100% recycled paper.
Use digital communication or recycled paper when possible.
Airport Tenants Short Term
Communications, City
Clerk, Human Resources
Continue using vegetable-based inks that are formulated
to reduce solvents.
As part of the Aviation Department Sustainability Management Plan
Update, a voluntary “Green Tenant” program is being developed to
encourage greater collaboration between the Aviation Department and
airport tenants on airport sustainability goals. The Aviation Department
met the waste diversion goal of 40 percent in 2019, a year earlier than
targeted.
Increase number of businesses that participate in the
“green tenant” program at Sky Harbor International Airport.
Aviation
ACTIONS MATRIX - WASTE AS A RESOURCE
203
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
WR6.1
Ameresco, Inc. Short Term
Renewable energy projects provide biological sources of natural gas,
which can displace natural gas from fossil fuel sources. Biogas that is
produced as a result of treatment at the wastewater treatment plants
contains methane. As part of the city’s pledge to be a sustainable and
cost-effective utility, a renewable energy project at 91st Avenue
Wastewater Treatment Plant treats, transfers and sells biogas as a
renewable green energy commodity. The city will investigate other
opportunities for biogas capture at other water and
wastewater treatment facilities.
GOAL WR6
Reduce GHG emissions from water and wastewater treatment by capturing biogas from treatment
processes and increasing renewable sources of energy.
Pending Actions
Identify water and wastewater facilities where biogas can be
treated, transferred and sold as a renewable green energy
commodity. Investigate other opportunities for biogas capture.
Water Services
ACTIONS MATRIX - WASTE AS A RESOURCE
204
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
AQ1.1
AQ1.2
AQ1.3
AIR QUALITY (AQ)
Implement new substantive policies and programs to
address top causes of air pollution emissions within
Phoenix and under Phoenix’s control by 2025.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Maricopa County Air
Quality Department Short Term
Within five years, Phoenix will implement new substantive policies and
programs to complement those policies and programs already in place.
Some of these already exist and only need to be fully implemented, like
the expansion of the public transit system, including light rail, and the
creation of safe and accessible walkways and bike paths to commute.
Many of the actions within the climate action plan will contribute to
decreasing air pollution emissions throughout the city and region. New
policies and programs may include increased air quality monitoring,
financial incentives, and increased education and outreach.
Publicly report annually on progress in reducing pollution levels
relative to targets and achieving the commitments in the Clean Air
Cities Declaration. Office of Environmental
Programs
Communications
Office Short Term
GOAL AQ1 Meet U.S. EPA National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS).
Quickstart Actions
Establish air pollutant baseline levels and set reduction targets
that meet NAAQS.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Maricopa County Air
Quality Department,
Maricopa Association
of Governments
Short Term
Progress will be reported annually to C40 Clean Air Cities and be made
available publicly.
These targets will put us on a path towards meeting World Health
Organization Air Quality Guidelines for particulate matter, nitrogen
dioxide, ozone, and sulfur dioxide. Phoenix already meets the
Guidelines for nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide.
ACTIONS MATRIX - AIR QUALITY
205
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
LFS1.1
LFS1.2
LFS1.3
LFS1.4
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
LFS2.1
LOCAL FOOD SYSTEMS (LFS)
GOAL LFS1
All people living in Phoenix will have enough to eat and have access to affordable, healthy, local, and
culturally appropriate food.
Pending Actions
Incorporate agriculture, food processing, and distribution into
existing and future land use plans. Collaborate with key partners
to facilitate new opportunities for urban-scale gardens, farms,
gleaning, and distribution systems.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Planning and
Development Short Term
PlanPHX emphasizes the importance of residents having access to
healthy food and sets measures for access within a ¼-mile. Policies
that are supportive of food access should be integrated into future
redevelopment, transit-oriented, and other land use plans. Explore
criteria for various transportation, tree and shade, urban heat island
and similar projects that create safe and convenient connections
between residential neighborhoods and healthy food assets. Study the
impacts of local food production on food equity and social justice for
low income communities.
Use existing financial resources for food production and
infrastructure. Pursue grants and other funding opportunities that
will enhance the community’s access to healthy foods.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Governmental,
philanthropic and
place-based funders
Short Term
Identify funding resources available through private sector, government,
and philanthropic sources. It is important to determine the viability of
using current funding mechanisms available from the city that can be
used for food system improvements. Collaborate with key partners to
facilitate new opportunities for urban-scale gardens, farms, gleaning,
and distribution systems.
Focus on efforts to address challenges within communities with limited
access to fresh healthy food, followed by a city-wide approach to
planning for food access for all communities. Identify existing food and
farm assets within food desert areas, such as the South Phoenix and
Maryvale communities. Develop asset maps that are accessible by
residents thought a variety of communication tools, including online
mapping, apps, social media with written resources available at city
libraries, community centers, and recreations centers.
Partner with schools and others to support and promote education
for youth and adults.
Office of Environmental
Programs
City of Phoenix Youth
& Education Office,
Phoenix School
Districts, Nonprofits,
community &
grassroot
organizations
GOAL LFS2
Businesses that produce, process, distribute, and sell local and healthy food will be recognized as integral
to the economy and encouraged to grow and thrive in Phoenix.
Pending Actions
Short Term
Support education and awareness on all aspects of the food system
and create opportunities to create or enhance urban agriculture, health
and nutrition education for youth, adults, and seniors. Collaborate with
state and county agencies working with school districts in Phoenix and
support Farm to Table programs in schools.
Promote existing healthy food assets, such as farmers markets,
grocery stores, retail, community gardens, farms, etc.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Community and
Economic
Development
Short Term
Office of Environmental
Programs
Community and
Economic
Development,
University of Arizona,
Arizona State
University
Short Term
Phoenix has the potential to be an agricultural technology innovation
hub, with a focus on farming that is water efficient, restorative and
adaptable to the arid climate and high temperatures. Coordination with
internal and external economic development professionals will be done
to evaluate the economic development potential of the food system as
a local industry cluster. Create opportunities to connect food production
businesses with available land. Continue to collaborate with academic
partners to establish an agriculture technology initiative.
Recognize food production as a highest and best use of land.
ACTIONS MATRIX - LOCAL FOOD SYSTEMS
206
LFS2.2
LFS2.3
LFS2.4
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
LFS3.1
LFS3.2
LFS3.3
Incorporate agriculture, food processing, and distribution into
existing and future economic development plans.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Municipal/Regional/St
ate Economic
Development
Organizations (EDOs)
Short Term
Assist agricultural entrepreneurs and existing food-related businesses
and identify financial and technical resources and the most effective
means to make those resources available. Develop comprehensive,
user-friendly information on the requirements of food production,
processing, and distribution businesses that is available from the city
and through partners.
GOAL LFS3 Growing food in Phoenix and the region will be easy and valued whether for personal or business use.
Pending Actions
Update codes and ordinances where appropriate to eliminate
barriers and encourage developing a healthy food infrastructure.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Planning and
Development, local
food producers, and
businesses
Short Term
Existing zoning codes will be further clarified to clearly identify which
zoning classifications and requirements are needed for various
agricultural and food production uses, commercial and residential,
including, hydroponic, aquaponics, growing inside structures, and for
burgeoning uses, such as rooftop and building-integrated agriculture.
Identify and update/amend appropriate sections of the zoning code to
clearly identify zoning districts in which agricultural land uses are
permitted. Develop definitions for agricultural land uses. Develop
streamlined processes for agricultural zoning. Explore the development
of an “Agritainment” zoning districts, and zoning incentive models
(density, PAD district, similar zoning options) that encourages set
asides of land for food production.
Establish a local food buying preference in future city contracts
and include in current Sustainable Purchasing Policy.
Office of Environmental
Programs Finance Short Term
Develop appropriate contract language that can be incorporated into
city contracts for the purchase of local food. Coordination with internal
departments to develop guidelines and language, and potentially set
procurement goals. Provide healthy, local produce to city employees
through a Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) program and pilot in
downtown city facilities initiated. Explore the development of heathy
procurement guidelines for city events and facilities.
Partner with stakeholders to support and promote a Buy Local
Food campaign.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Local First Arizona
Foundation, MarCo,
Local Food
Producers, Grocers
Short Term
Educate and engage residents on the benefits of purchasing locallyproduced food. Develop a Buy Local Food Campaign in collaboration
with partners, such as Local First Arizona Foundation and others.
Partnership opportunities with grocers to further promote Buy Local will
be established or enhanced.
Explore development of agriculture community land trusts and/or
preservation mechanisms.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Community and
Economic, Real
Estate, Water
Services, Planning
and Development,
MarCo, Arizona
Community Land
Trust
Short Term
Various mechanisms that could be used in concert with nonprofit and
private partnerships to preserve land for food production will be
identified, as well as best practices of other cities. Existing city policies
impacting agricultural land uses will be reviewed. Recommendations
will be made for new or modifications to existing policies.
Explore the use of city-owned parcels as opportunities for urban
agriculture, focused on food deserts within irrigation districts.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Parks and Recreation,
Public Works, Water
Services, Real Estate
Short Term
Develop, with city departments, guidelines on how to lease/buy city
owned land for food production, including establishing appropriate
minimum length of lease terms feasible for agriculture. Adopt policies
allowing the use of park land and other city-owned land, where feasible
and appropriate, for food production. An inventory of land potentially
available for agricultural use will be created, including Brownfields.
Upon identification of available city-owned land located in food desert
and irrigation district areas, a Request for Proposal for agricultural
development may be issued.
ACTIONS MATRIX - LOCAL FOOD SYSTEMS
207
LFS3.4
LFS3.5
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
LFS4.1
LFS4.2
LFS4.3
GOAL LFS4
Food-related waste will be prevented, reused, or recycled via sustainable food production practices that
maintain a healthy environment.
Pending Actions
Update codes and ordinances to clarify food waste diversion, i.e.,
composting opportunities.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Planning and
Development, Public
Works Department,
MarCo, Business
Short Term
Providing clear and understandable codes and ordinances to clarify
food waste diversion, such as composting, is essential to a thriving
local food system. This includes identifying and updating/amending
appropriate sections of the zoning code to clearly identify zoning
requirements for composting opportunities.
Support the growth of land uses that contribute to a healthy and
sustainable food system (i.e. grocery stores, community gardens,
urban farms and other urban agriculture elements).
Office of Environmental
Programs
Planning and
Development,
Community and
Economic
Development, Greater
Phoenix Economic
Council, school
districts
Short Term
In addition to city-owned land, there is the opportunity to support efforts
to expand urban food production on residential, commercial and
institutional properties. Support and encourage collaboration between
public and private sectors and small/medium sized farms, food-hubs,
mobile markets, co-ops, community and back-yard gardens. Establish
community commercial kitchens and/or use existing commercial
kitchens. Explore opportunities to work with vacant schools with
kitchens to use as a training and economic development resource will
be performed.
Use existing and explore new job training resources, where
feasible, and partner with others to provide training opportunities.
Office of Environmental
Programs
City of Phoenix
Workforce
Development,
Maricopa Community
Colleges, University
of Arizona
Short Term
A cornerstone in a sustainable local food system is the development of
career pathways in farming. Support programs focused on training
future farmers and collaborate with partners and institutions, such as
the University of Arizona Cooperative Extension of Maricopa County.
Identify other potential partners with a focus on providing training for
new farmers. Facilitate business training programs for farmers to gain
more marketing knowledge and expertise. Explore city policies that
support the creation of agricultural employment training opportunities to
further promote job creation in the agriculture sector.
Support and promote methods to prevent edible food from
entering the waste stream.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Public Works, MarCo,
Waste Not,
restaurants,
institutions
Short Term
A key factor in preventing food waste is to provide means for edible
food to be consumed. In the United States an estimated 30-40% of food
goes uneaten and ends up in landfills, further contributing to GHG
emissions. Creating opportunities to provide edible food to those that
don’t have enough to eat involves collaborating with stakeholders to
identify solutions. Opportunities for collaboration with other
stakeholders involved in the prevention of food waste and food rescue
will be evaluated.
Promote and support sustainable practices in all areas of the food
system.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Community and
Economic
Development, ASU,
Cities within Maricopa
County
Short Term
The food economy is an integral contributor to the overall economic
vitality of the City. Business opportunities are varied, from agricultural
entrepreneurs, catering, restaurants, food trucks, mobile markets, retail,
such as neighborhood bodegas or convenience stores, and for
backyard gardeners to sell their produce. Identifying and providing
business resources, including water and energy efficiency, regenerative
agricultural practices, and safe food handling are keys to creating a
sustainable food economy. Continue working toward development of a
Sustainable Food Economy Accelerator for entrepreneurs. Identify
mechanisms to assist food-related businesses, including technical
assistance and financial resources.
ACTIONS MATRIX - LOCAL FOOD SYSTEMS
208
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
LFS5.1
LFS5.2
LFS5.3
LFS5.4
GOAL LFS5
Develop food policies and actions that address local and global challenges posed by climate change,
urbanization, political and economic crises, population growth and other factors.
Pending Actions
Research policies and actions that plan for future shocks related
to changing population growth, hazards, economic conditions and
climate.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Stakeholders from
within all aspects of
the local food system.
Short Term
Conduct research on best practices and explore ways to integrate food
system resiliency within existing and future hazard mitigation,
emergency response, and or resilience planning efforts. OEP would
serve as the lead for food systems in future resilience planning.
Coordination with City Departments and external stakeholders will
identify opportunities for food system integration.
Complete a GHG Emissions Inventory for the local food system,
defined as Maricopa County.
Office of Environmental
Programs
MarCo; University of
Arizona, NRDC,
ICLEI, ASU
Short Term Complete a GHG emissions inventory of the local food system, that is
Maricopa County, to determine which reduction actions will be
necessary to reduce the GHG emissions from the production,
processing and delivery of food across Phoenix and the region.
Convene local food producers with city staff, leaders, and elected
officials to build trust and understanding.
Office of Environmental
Programs
Phoenix elected
officials and city
departments, Local
First Arizona
Foundation, local food
producers
Create opportunities and collaborate with stakeholders to identify Short Term
solutions for providing edible food to those that don’t have enough to
eat.
Explore funding opportunities from federal, state, and
philanthropic organizations for food system activities and staff.
Office of Environmental
Programs Potential funders Short Term
Identify and submit for funding opportunities from federal, state, and
philanthropic organizations for food system activities and staff.
Resources to conduct recommended actions will be needed. Obtaining
funding from all feasible and available resources will be paramount to
the success of achieving the goals, strategies and actions identified.
ACTIONS MATRIX - LOCAL FOOD SYSTEMS
209
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
H1.1
H1.2
H1.3
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
H2.1
H2.2
Develop walkshed mapping tool to identify key pedestrian
corridors and priority routes for adding shade in vulnerable
neighborhoods and increase shade provided by trees or
constructed shade.
A next generation Walkshed mapping tool, based on the principles of a
model developed by Harvard students studying in Phoenix, is being
developed in partnership with ASU to identify key pedestrian corridors
and priority routes for adding shade in vulnerable neighborhoods. The
tool considers zero car households, proximity to schools, shopping and
transit, and identified the most likely routes or “walkshed” that
pedestrians would likely take in a given neighborhood. The tool is being
piloted in 2021 and will be used to select corridors for implementing
priority tree and shade elements.
Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (New),
Office of Sustainability
ASU Short Term
A new MOU with American Forests signed in 2021 hopes to achieve
“Tree Equity” where all of Phoenix’s neighborhoods will reach a minimal
standard of tree canopy cover that is feasible and appropriate for the
city’s desert climate and conditions by 2030. Tree Equity is the term
American Forests trademarked to raise awareness about the need to
address historic disparities in tree canopy in cities throughout the
United States. The current Tree Equity Score for each neighborhood
can be viewed at treeequityscore.org
Street Transportation Medium Term
Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (New),
Office of Sustainability
Achieve “Tree Equity” where all of Phoenix’s neighborhoods will
reach a minimal standard of tree canopy cover that is feasible and
appropriate for the city’s desert climate and conditions by 2030.
TreeKeeper, Office of Heat
Response
and Mitigation (New)
HEAT (H)
GOAL H1
Create a network of 100 cool corridors in vulnerable communities by 2030 to facilitate movement of people
walking, biking and using transit, particularly within and connecting to Transit Oriented Development
Districts, Village Cores, and Centers.
Quickstart Actions
Update Phoenix’s Walkable Urban Code to include additional
heat mitigation standards.
Planning and Development Short Term
The Walkable Urban Code is applicable to and regulates some
development within Transit Oriented Development Districts and in
proximity to high capacity transit. Additional heat mitigation standards
are being considered to be included in the code, along with the current
shade requirements.
Pending Actions
TreeKeeper Short Term
The 2021 Budget approved funding for updating the City’s Tree
Inventory—where every tree in parks, streets and rights of way will be
inventoried. A contract will be issued to measure and report on tree
information including the identification of lost and unhealthy trees.
Using TreeKeeper software, trees will be tracked as they are planted
and removed, along with the estimated value of the trees and their
associated environmental benefits.
Educate city staff on proper tree care, including Right Tree, Right
Place training, and the use of tall pots to help establish plants.
Parks & Recreation
Office of Heat
Response and
Mitigation (New),
Street Transportation,
Office of
Sustainability,
AmeriCorps VISTA
Increasing the tree canopy of the urban forest requires that the right Short Term
trees are planted in the right place for long-term growth. Recently, in
order to increase the success rate of planting, a method was piloted to
use tall pots to increase the number of plants that survive.
GOAL H2
Increase shade provided by trees or constructed shade in 'flatland parks' (not preserves) and street rightsof-ways to achieve a 25% tree and shade canopy in pedestrian areas by 2030, prioritizing communities most
vulnerable to heat, particularly within and connecting to Transit Oriented Development Districts, Village
Cores, and Centers.
Ongoing Actions
Update city’s tree inventory by 2023.
ACTIONS MATRIX - HEAT
210
H2.3
H2.4
H2.5
H2.6
H2.7
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
H3.1
Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (New), Street
Transportation, Parks and
Recreation
Office of
Sustainability,
Planning and
Development
Medium Term
The Tree and Shade Master Plan launched in 2010 with a vision to
double the tree and shade canopy by 2030. The Tree and Shade
Master Plan implementation is supported by over $5 million in annual
funding to city departments as part of a City-wide program with over
4,000 trees now being planted annually on city streets, parks and rights
of way. This goal is further supported by the tree planting as part of the
cool corridors with an additional 1,800 trees per year and an additional
1,000 trees per year through public donations for a total anticipated tree
planting of 6,800 trees annually.
Parks and Recreation
Office of Heat
Response and
Mitigation (New)
The Parks and Recreation Department has set a goal to plant 1,500 Medium Term
trees annually. As of summer 2020, 131 out of 160 flatland parks
currently meet the 25% canopy coverage.
Implement Project sunBLOCK, which includes permanent and
temporary public art microclimates.
Arts and Culture
National Endowment
for the Arts, Public
Transit, Street
Transportation, Office
of Heat Response
and Mitigation (New)
Short Term
Project sunBLOCK is composed of permanent and temporary public art
microclimates that lower the intense heat confronting pedestrians along
key corridors in two of Central Phoenix’s hottest neighborhoods by
2023. The project brings community, artists, designers and
environmental specialists together to create designs that both visually
and physically cool transit stops and surrounding streetscapes.
Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (New),
Office of Environmental
Programs, Office of
Sustainability
Environmental Quality
and Sustainability
Commission
Short Term
At the direction of the Phoenix City Council, the Environmental Quality
and Sustainability Commission (EQSC) created the Urban Heat Island/
Tree and Shade Subcommittee (UHITS) with the purpose to evaluate,
analyze and recommend policies to address the issues surrounding
Urban Heat and to advance implementation of the Phoenix Tree and
Shade Master Plan. Input and recommendations from the
subcommittee will be provided to the EQSC for approval and then
passed on to City Council.
GOAL H3 Provide resources and services to residents to manage heat.
Ongoing Actions
Educate the community on proper planting and care for trees
through the Citizen Forester Program.
Parks and Recreation
Street Transportation,
Office of
Sustainability,
AmeriCorps VISTA,
Office of Heat
Response and
Mitigation (new)
Short Term
Continue to implement the Tree and Shade Master Plan
to establish 25% tree and shade canopy in streets and
pedestrian areas by 2030.
Increase tree and shade canopy of flatland parks by 25% by 2020.
(Preserves are not considered flatland parks.)
Pending Actions
Increase shade at public transit stops in the city.
Public Transit
Office of Heat
Response and
Mitigation (New)
Medium Term
An overarching goal of the T2050 plan was to provide all residents in
the city with accessible transit and build ridership. Within that goal is
the element to provide shade at all 4,050 bus stops in the city.
Currently, 2,680 of those bus stops have constructed shade structures.
Increasing the tree canopy throughout the city will require community
participation. Education on how to properly plant and care for trees is
provided through the Citizen Forester program. Citizen Foresters
advocate for trees by promoting best practices regarding proper tree
planting and maintenance techniques, while supporting community
efforts to achieve tree and shade canopy goals. Residents can become
certified as Citizen Foresters and assist in the planting and care of the
urban forest.
Coordinate and track the planting of trees to achieve the
25% tree and shade canopy goal.
ACTIONS MATRIX - HEAT
H2.2
TreeKeeper, Office of Heat
Response
and Mitigation (New)
TreeKeeper Short Term
The 2021 Budget approved funding for updating the City’s Tree
Inventory—where every tree in parks, streets and rights of way will be
inventoried. A contract will be issued to measure and report on tree
information including the identification of lost and unhealthy trees.
Using TreeKeeper software, trees will be tracked as they are planted
and removed, along with the estimated value of the trees and their
associated environmental benefits.
Update city’s tree inventory by 2023.
211
H3.2
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
H4.1
H4.2
H4.3
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
H5.1
H5.2 Expand HeatReady Certification nationally or internationally.
Office of Sustainability,
Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (new)
ASU, C40, National
Weather Service,
Global Cool Cities
Alliance
Short Term
After piloting and refining HeatReady Certification in Arizona, ASU and
the city are seeking to test HeatReady nationally and internationally to
increase its functionality and shared learnings and, more importantly,
its impact. C40 and the Global Cool Cities Alliance have both
expressed interest in becoming the global verification and certification
body once the certification tool reaches maturity.
GOAL H5 Develop HeatReady certification for cities in partnership with ASU by 2025.
Quickstart Actions
Street Transportation
Office of
Sustainability, ASU,
Office of Heat
Response
and Mitigation (new)
Short Term
A Cool Pavement pilot is currently underway in eight Phoenix
neighborhoods and one city park. Phoenix wants to test the cool
pavement material to see whether it is effective at reducing
temperatures in Phoenix desert climate. A second project was initiated
in 2021 in four neighborhoods, all proximal to one another, to test the
effective of varying types of cool pavement. Research will continue
through 2025.
Street Transportation,
Office of Sustainability
Street Transportation,
Office of
Sustainability,
Office of Heat
Response and
Mitigation (new)
Medium Term
Be a living laboratory to test new materials that could mitigate urban
heat island when implemented at scale. Many promising materials are
coming on the market yet their performance in high temperature
conditions, their durability and the overall economics need further
study. For example, ASU is currently evaluating a new material from 3M
that reflects heat as long wave radiation while cooling the underlying
surface. ASU is also testing various coatings as part of the overall cool
pavement analysis—installing temperature sensors below the
pavement surface and at grade.
Complete cool pavement pilot program and expand program to
areas where it would be most effective.
Be a living laboratory to test cool materials for use in
Infrastructure projects.
Pending Actions
Pending Actions
Pilot HeatReady certification in partnership with ASU.
Office of Sustainability,
Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (new)
ASU Short Term
Where more than 2,000 cities, including Phoenix, have achieved
“StormReady” certification by the National Weather Service, ASU in
partnership with the City are seeking to pilot a HeatReady certification
program—identifying the policies, programs and governance framework
and scorecard to assist cities in preparing for increasing temperatures
and heat waves. With Phoenix being the epicenter of research related
to heat and a hotbed of heat-related programs, ASU and the city are
seeking to develop HeatReady to allow it to become a national or
international certification program.
GOAL H4 Increase the use of high albedo, or reflective, materials in infrastructure projects.
Ongoing Actions
Public Works
Office of Heat
Response and
Mitigation (new)
Continue to implement the Cool (Energy Star) Roofs on city-owned
buildings.
Short Term
Coating the roof reduces the amount of energy needed to cool the
building, reducing GHG emissions. Cool (Energy Star) Roofs is the
standard for all departments that work with the Public Works
Department (PWD) to handle their roof replacement, as well as for
those buildings owned by PWD. This type of roof has been
implemented for PWD owned buildings since 2005.
Continue to participate in the Heat Relief Regional Network.
Office of Heat Response
and Mitigation (new), All
Departments
MAG Short Term
The Heat Relief Regional Network is a regional partnership of the
Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG), municipalities, nonprofit
organizations, the faith-based community, and businesses. The Heat
Relief Regional Network works with 137 partner organizations to
provide water, resources and wellness checks in communities
alongside an education and awareness campaign each summer
focusing on vulnerable communities. The number of heat related
deaths in the county has risen in each of the last four years
with nearly 200 heat related deaths in 2019.
ACTIONS MATRIX - HEAT
212
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
W1.1
W1.2
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
W2.1
W2.2
W2.3
Aviation
Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, located at the end of the
Camelback Mountain south watershed, will improve stormwater
drainage efficiency by performing preventative maintenance that will
improve capacity and reduce backup surging preventing flooding and
contamination of the stormwater runoff.
WATER (W)
GOAL W1 Identify and implement infrastructure projects to ensure water security.
Quickstart Actions
Design and construct additional infrastructure to provide a
reliable water supply to 1.7 million customers.
Water Services Street Transportation,
Finance Short Term
The Drought Pipeline Project will provide Salt and Verde River water
supplies to areas of the city that are currently entirely dependent on
Colorado River water. The project is essential to the economic health
and vitality of Phoenix. This sustainability project will ensure all
residents have access to safe, reliable, clean drinking water during the
future times of shortage on the Colorado River. This project will be
financed using sustainability bonds, a result of the recent development
of the Green and Sustainability Bond Framework. This will result in loan
service cost savings.
Short Term
Arizona is a leader in water banking, the practice of storing water
underground to be used later. Millions of acre-feet of water have been
banked in Central Arizona aquifers through the Arizona Water Banking
Authority. The water that is delivered to residents comes from
renewable surface water supplies, so that groundwater can be saved
for the future. In addition, a water-sharing agreement with Tucson will
continue, where Phoenix will store some of its unused Colorado River
water in aquifers in Tucson. In times of shortage, Tucson will give
Phoenix some of its Colorado River water allocation in exchange for
this stored water.
GOAL W2
Improve conservation of water resources by improving stormwater management, optimizing water use,
conducting water audits, and utilizing wastewater.
Implement successful Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport
commercial cooling tower system upgrade program in other
processes throughout city of Phoenix and encourage commercial
and industrial adoption of process.
Aviation
Cooling towers are one of Phoenix’s highest volume water uses. The
Cooling Tower System Upgrade was successfully completed reducing
water use by 20%.This cooling water treatment system was also
installed as part of the Terminal Modernization Project and a system is
now being installed in the Rental Car enter. Future opportunities are
being investigated for municipal operations and commercial use.
Short Term
Ongoing Actions
Pending Actions
Identify and implement water saving measures on city of Phoenix
facilities and processes.
Water Services All Departments Short Term
A city-wide Internal Water Efficiency Task Force was created to monitor
water used by municipal operations to identify and implement water
saving measures. As a result of the task force, water use dropped 46.5
million gallons. On-going tracking of water usage in Parks and Aviation
Departments is possible by a GIS program developed by Water
Services Department.
Water Services,
Finance Short Term
Continue to bank water, which is storing water underground
for use at a later date.
 Water Services
City of Tucson,
Arizona Water
Banking Authority
Ongoing Actions
Improve stormwater drainage capacity and reduce backup
surging at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport.
ACTIONS MATRIX - WATER
213
W2.4
City Lead Partnerships Timeframe
W3.1
W3.2
W3.3
Water conservation has always been part of Phoenix’s strategy to
maintain a 100-year water supply. Residents are encouraged to adopt
xeriscape landscaping with efficient irrigation controllers through a
program that subsidizes the cost of smart irrigation controllers for
residential use. Expanding this program will reduce water use and
lower costs for residents.
Implement the use of the Greater Phoenix Green
Infrastructure and Low Impact Development Details
for Alternative Stormwater Management.
Planning and Development,
Water Services, Office of
Environmental Programs
The Greater Phoenix Green Infrastructure and Low Impact
Development Details for Alternative Stormwater Management is a
handbook that provides technical standard details and specifications
(TSDS) to be used for low impact development to members of the
design, planning and development communities in Maricopa County.
These TSDS will primarily be used on right of way projects and can
be implemented in private projects. Using the handbook will result
in environmental benefits, water conservation, urban heat reduction,
improvement in public health and additional green spaces.
GOAL W3
Increase outreach and provide programs to residents and businesses to reduce water use to 155 GPCD by
2030.
Pending Actions
Expand existing SRP program that subsidizes cost of irrigation
controllers for residential use.
Water Services SRP Short Term
MAG, ADEQ, ASU Short Term
Expand Toilet Retrofit Program to include a low-income program
and other incentives.
Water Services Short Term
Expand the Homeowners Association Audit Program.
 Water Services Short Term
To conserve water, the feasibility of a new toilet retrofit program is
being evaluated. The elements that the program will contain are a lowincome program that includes toilet and professional installation at no
cost to customer and a flat rebate program to all customers that
purchase and install a low flow toilet that uses 1.28 gallons per flush.
Homeowners Associations (HOA) use water to maintain common
landscaped areas, which can lead to high costs and high water usage
to keep the areas looking attractive. Up to 70% of water used by
residents is for outdoor watering. Phoenix piloted a HOA Audit Program
that conducted nine audits of outdoor water use within common areas
managed by HOAs. Based on that pilot, the potential average savings
for the HOAs that volunteered to participate was 4.5 million gallons per
year if they implemented the recommendations from the audit. The
program will be expanded from pilot to ongoing program by increasing
the number of inspections from nine to 40.
ACTIONS MATRIX - WATER