1
October 2019
MAYOR MARTIN J. WALSH
CITY OF BOSTON
CLIMATE ACTION PLAN
2019 UPDATE
2 2019 Boston CAP Update
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION.............................................................6
CLIMATE ACTION ACROSS
THE CITY.....................................................................................14
OUR PROGRESS
SINCE 2014.............................................................................17
BOSTON’S CARBON
FOOTPRINT.........................................................................23
RISING TO THE CARBON
NEUTRALITY CHALLENGE......................27
2020-2024 CARBON
REDUCTION PLAN.................................................. 31
BUILDINGS.......................................................................................33
1. Construct new municipal buildings to a zero
net carbon standard....................................................................37
2. Adopt a zero net carbon standard for City-funded
affordable housing in Boston..................................................38
3. Strengthen green building zoning requirements
to a zero net carbon standard................................................40
4. Invest in energy efficiency and renewable energy
generation in municipal buildings .......................................42
5. Develop a carbon emissions performance
standard to decarbonize existing large buildings ........44
2019 Boston CAP Update 3
6. Expand workforce development programs
for building decarbonization...................................................47
7. Advocate for state building policies that
align with carbon neutrality by 2050................................... 52
TRANSPORTATION ...................................................................54
8. Advocate for Boston’s priority transit projects within
regional plans.................................................................................57
9. Improve and expand active transportation
infrastructure .................................................................................60
10. Encourage mode shift through transportation
demand management and sustainable parking
policies...............................................................................................62
11. Support citywide zero-emission vehicle
deployment.....................................................................................65
12. Accelerate municipal fleet transition to zeroand low-emission vehicles........................................................68
ENERGY SUPPLY.........................................................................70
13. Implement and expand Community
Choice Energy.................................................................................71
14. Plan for the deployment of carbon-neutral district
energy microgrid systems........................................................73
15. Support state policies and programs that further
decarbonize the region's and Boston’s
energy supply.................................................................................75
A CARBON-FREE COMMUNITY....................................77
16. Decarbonize the consumption of Boston
residents and businesses..........................................................78
17. Green municipal investments ................................................79
18. Develop a values-based framework for
carbon offsets.................................................................................79
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS......................................................... 81
© Image by k_notgeil from Pixabay
4 2019 Boston CAP Update |
© Jeremiah Robinson
Now, we’re taking our next big step. The 2019 Climate Action Plan Update details
the specific actions we will take over the next five years to significantly cut emissions across all sectors of
city life, in order to reach our ultimate goal of carbon neutrality.
Our work is informed by the most up-to-date science and projections from climate experts. The recent
report from the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), as well as the United
States’ Fourth National Climate Assessment, show that the global community must act with urgency to
confront this crisis before it’s too late. In Boston, we’re heeding this warning, and setting a strong example
by acting to become carbon neutral by 2050.
The Climate Action Plan is by the people and for the people of Boston. Over five years, we talked with
thousands of Bostonians at dozens of Greenovate events and public forums. We worked closely with
businesses, non-profits, colleges and universities, and faith communities. We heard over and over that
climate change is already affecting people’s lives. They have seen stronger storms and more flooding along
our waterfront. This past summer was the hottest ever on record, with heat waves putting our most
vulnerable communities at risk. Climate change is here. It’s happening now, and our city is united in our
commitment to address it.
This carbon reduction plan works hand-in-hand with Climate Ready Boston, our initiative to prepare
neighborhoods for the impacts we know we will face as a result of climate change, as well as Resilient
Boston Harbor, our plan to strengthen Boston’s entire 47-mile coastline with a system of parks, beaches,
and trails that block floods and improve quality of life all year round.
We know communities that contribute the least to climate pollution bear the greatest impacts of climate
change. As we reduce emissions and prepare our communities for the impacts of climate change, we must
place people first. This means designing and implementing policies for and with communities of color, lowincome neighborhoods, youth, older adults, women, people with impairments, persons facing homelessness,
and people with limited English proficiency. This also means asking those who have contributed
disproportionately to climate change to take action first. By placing equity at the heart of climate action, we
can achieve fair outcomes for every Bostonian.
Implementing this plan is a major undertaking, and it’s one of the most important challenges we’ll face as
a city. It will require courageous solutions and creative teamwork. We must make our buildings and our
transportation systems much more energy efficient. We must invest in clean energy and job training.
We must rise to the occasion, because our city’s future depends on it. We will be successful, because
Bostonians are known for pursuing what is right and just, even in the face of adversity. We know what’s at
stake if we do not act with urgency. I look forward to working with you as we build a carbon-free and
climate-ready future.
Sincerely,
Martin J. Walsh, Mayor
2019 Boston CAP Update | Letter from the Mayor 5
Dear neighbors,
Addressing climate change has been a top priority for my administration ever
since I took office in 2014. We’ve worked hard to cut the emissions that cause
climate change, prepare our neighborhoods for its inevitable effects, and make
sure Boston is a thriving and healthy community for generations to come. I’m
proud of the progress we’ve made so far, from committing to become carbon
neutral, to creating the first vision for a resilient Boston Harbor and coastline.
We’ve made Boston a national and international leader in this work.
6 2019 Boston CAP Update | Introduction
INTRODUCTION
The City of Boston has long recognized the importance of climate action to safeguard the future of our
community. In 2007, the City began releasing and updating a Climate Action Plan that sets ambitious goals
to reduce emissions and prepare for the impacts of climate change, and lays out strategies to reach them.
In 2017, Mayor Martin J. Walsh strengthened our emissions reduction goal to achieving carbon neutrality.
The 2019 Climate Action Plan Update sets the stage for Boston’s transition to carbon neutrality and
describes our work plan for the next five years. By laying out detailed steps, this Plan sets the City and all
of its partners up for success.
2019 Boston CAP Update | Introduction 7
Individuals and organizations across the city have
already taken many significant steps to reduce
their climate impact. Boston has added more
than 24 MW in local solar power capacity since
2015.1
 More than 56,000 homes, or 22 percent of
all households in Boston, have received no-cost
energy assessments from Mass Save.2
 The number
of households that use fuel oil for heating has
dropped from more than 45,000 to under 22,000.3
Energy-positive (E+) homes are being built in
Dorchester, Roxbury, Jamaica Plain and Mission
Hill. Large commercial buildings (50,000 square
feet or larger) reduced their total energy use by
more than 7 percent between 2013 and 2017, and
large new developments are identifying pathways
to carbon neutrality and exploring district energy
systems. Boston residents and workers drove 14
percent fewer miles per person in 2017 than they
did in 2005.
1 Massachusetts Clean Energy Center, Renewable Energy Production Tracking System, accessed online July 2019.
2 Data from Mass Save (2009- Q2 2019), and U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 5-Year Estimates.
3 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), 1-Year Estimates.
4 In this document, “carbon” or “carbon emissions” refers to greenhouse gas emissions measured in tons of carbon dioxide equivalent. For more information,
please refer to the City of Boston Greenhouse Gas Inventory Methodology.
The 2019 Climate Action Plan Update will accelerate
Boston’s progress, charting a clear course for
reaching Boston’s 2030 and 2050 carbon reduction
goals.4
 These actions will require the collaboration
of all sectors, especially to ensure that benefits are
shared equitably among Boston residents.
WHAT IS CARBON NEUTRALITY?
Carbon neutrality means releasing no net carbon
emissions on an annual basis. For Boston, this
means reducing carbon emissions from buildings,
transportation, waste, and our energy supply as
much as possible, and supporting activities that
remove carbon from the atmosphere (carbon
offsets) to compensate for any remaining emissions.
According to the Carbon Free Boston analysis, we can
eliminate up to 90 percent of carbon emissions using
existing technologies.
The City of Boston has installed solar panels on the roof of the Tobin Community Center.
8 2019 Boston CAP Update | Introduction
 YRS
AHEAD OF
SCHEDULE
Boston reached its 2020 carbon
target for municipal operations
- City of Boston 2017 GHG Inventory Report
MOST ENERGYEFFICIENT CITY
1 2019
in the country, 2013 through 2019
- American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy
to commit to Deadline 2020 - C40 Cities
OF FIRST
SIX CITIES National Planning
Achievement Award for
Resilience
- American Planning Association
10-MINUTE
WALKS
Every Bostonian lives within a
10-minute walk from a high-quality
public park
- The Trust for Public Land
BOSTON IS...
#3 most walkable city in the U.S.
- 2019 Walk Score
#1

2019 Boston CAP Update | Introduction 9
STATE OF THE CLIMATE
Since Boston released its first Climate Action Plan in 2007, our climate has changed considerably:
5 Monthly Mean Average Temperature for Boston Area, MA from Northeast Regional Climate Center, NOWData, accessed online 4 September 2019.
6 National Weather Service, “Boston Breaks Record Seasonal Snowfall,” 15 March 2015, accessed online 26 September 2019.
7 National Weather Service, Record Event Report, April 22nd, 2019, accessed online 4 September 2019.
8 Historic crest from National Weather Service, Boston Harbor Hydrograph, accessed online 26 September 2019.
9 City of Boston, “Climate Ready Boston: Final Report,” December 2016, pp. xviii-xxxi.
› July 2019 was Boston’s hottest month on record
since record-keeping began in 1872.5
› In the winter of 2015, Boston broke its all-time
seasonal snow record since we began keeping
records in 1872.6
› On 22 April 2019, Boston received 2.3 inches of
rain, which broke an 82-year old record. The
previous single-day record was 1.89 inches in
April 1937.7
› In January 2018, Boston experienced a “bomb
cyclone” that caused tidal surge and icy flooding.
The National Weather Service recorded its
highest water level since it began keeping records
for Boston Habor in 1921.8
As a coastal city, Boston is particularly vulnerable to sea level rise, as well as other effects of climate
change such as extreme temperatures and precipitation. These effects will disproportionately affect
communities of color, women, youth, disabled people, elderly people and people with limited English
proficiency. Projected impacts include:9
› By 2050, Boston’s summers may be as hot as
Washington, DC’s summers are today; by the
end of the century, they may be hotter than
Birmingham, AL summers are today.
› Heat-related mortality was 2.9 per 100,000 people
per year in Boston from 1985 to 2016. This rate is
expected to more than double in the 2020s. By
the 2080s, this rate may more than triple to 10.5
per 100,000 under a moderate emissions scenario,
and could reach 19.3 per 100,000 in a “businessas-usual” emissions scenario.
› As soon as the 2050s, 7 percent of the total land
area in the city could be exposed to stormwater
flooding from more frequent, more intense rain
storms.
› At the end of the century, between 10 and 20
percent of Charlestown, East Boston, Downtown,
and South Boston will face flooding at high tide,
even when there is no storm.
› In the latter part of this century (2070s or later),
if we don’t act, the buildings most exposed to
coastal and river flooding will predominantly be
residential and mixed-use buildings that house
over 88,000 people (nearly 15 percent of Boston’s
population).
The Charles River froze over during the winter of 2015,
when Boston received a record amount of snow.
© Robbie Shade
Bostonians take a break from the summer heat in the Frog
Pond at the Commons.
© Caroline Stjarnborg
10 2019 Boston CAP Update | Introduction
BOSTON’S CLIMATE GOALS
10 City of Boston, “Climate Ready Boston: Final Report,” December 2016, p. xviii.
In 2011, the City of Boston set carbon reduction
goals of 25 percent by 2020 and 80 percent by
2050 below 2005 levels. To avoid more extreme
climate change impacts, Boston, and indeed the
entire global community, needs to take bolder
action sooner. Future sea level rise and temperature
change depend on how much we, around the
world, are able to cut carbon emissions. With a
sharp reduction in global emissions, end of
century sea level rise could stay under two feet
in Boston; a continuation of business as usual
may result in over seven feet of sea level rise.10
In his 2017 State of the City address, Mayor Martin
J. Walsh announced Boston’s goal of carbon
neutrality by 2050—an ambitious yet necessary
commitment to meet the urgency of the climate
challenge. Becoming carbon neutral means that in
2050 Boston will release no net carbon emissions
into the atmosphere. In Imagine Boston 2030, our
city’s long-term strategic plan, we also set an
interim carbon reduction goal of 50 percent by
2030. Our carbon neutrality goal means that Boston
is fulfilling our commitment to the Paris Climate
Agreement and leading efforts to keep global
warming under 1.5 degrees Celsius.
By 2017, the City of Boston reduced emissions
from municipal buildings and fleets by more
than 40 percent below 2005 levels. Based on
the progress the City expects to make in energy
efficiency and renewable energy, this Plan increases
our reduction goal for municipal operations from
50 percent to 60 percent by 2030.
CO2e
WASTE REDUCTION
Become a zero waste
community and increase the
recycling rate from 25% to
ADAPTATION
Prepare for sea level rise,
hotter summers, and more
rainfall during storms
MITIGATION
Reduce community-wide carbon
emissions by
50in 2030
% 100in 2050
%
&
Reduce municipal emissions by
60in 2030
% 100in 2050
%
&
MOBILITY
Empower Bostonians to
access all parts of the city
safely and reliably by transit,
on foot or on a bike
CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
Enhance community connectivity so
that all families may thrive in a
carbon-neutral, climate-ready Boston
80%
2019 Boston CAP Update | Introduction 11
CARBON REDUCTION AND CLIMATE ADAPTATION
Why we need to do both
Climate action has been divided into two primary strategies: carbon reduction and climate adaptation.
Carbon reduction (sometimes called "mitigation") addresses the cause of climate change by stopping the
release of greenhouse gases, and even drawing carbon out of the atmosphere. If we reduce emissions
sufficiently, we can limit changes to the Earth's climate and avoid the worst climate change projections.
Adaptation addresses the impacts of climate change by preparing communities and the natural and built
environment to withstand local climate change impacts. Even if we achieve our carbon reduction goals, the
unprecedented amount of carbon we have released into the atmosphere is already changing our climate.
Adaptation to these locked-in changes is necessary. However, if Boston and other communities do not
eliminate carbon emissions, climate change could overwhelm our adaptation efforts. Climate Ready Boston,
described later in this report, is our initiative to prepare Boston for the effects of climate change.
Effective climate action requires both adaptation and carbon reduction strategies.
12 2019 Boston CAP Update | Introduction
Reaching carbon neutrality aligns with our goals
to enhance our community’s resilience to the
impacts of climate change. The ambitious plans
to protect the city from the impacts of climate
change (Climate Ready Boston) will not be effective
for long unless we address the cause. Actions to
reduce carbon emissions also remove harmful air
pollutants from our homes, places of work and
streets. Making our buildings more energy efficient
and fossil fuel free will make homes healthier and
more comfortable and workplaces more productive.
Investing in local clean power, energy storage and
energy infrastructure will make our city more
resilient to extreme weather. Investing in our
building stock will create jobs and new business
and research opportunities.
The City of Boston is committed to simultaneously
addressing racial and social equity and
environmental challenges. Vulnerable groups
such as communities of color and low-income
neighborhoods are often disproportionately
impacted by environmental shocks and stresses
and are less likely to have access to the resources
necessary for recovery. Climate action in Boston
has two guiding principles for equity.
First, people of color and low-income communities
must not be disproportionately impacted by climate
hazards. Second, benefits from climate mitigation
and preparedness efforts should be shared
equitably among all people.
DEADLINE 2020
The City of Boston is a member of C40 Cities, a global
network of about 100 cities working together to limit
climate change. Their 2017 report, Deadline 2020,
found that the world’s megacities needed to take
significant action by 2020 to be on a path to meet
their targets under the Paris Agreement for keeping
global temperature rise below 1.5 degrees Celsius.
By taking the actions identified in Deadline 2020,
C40 cities could deliver around 40 percent of the
global savings needed to achieve the goals of the Paris
Agreement. This Climate Action Plan Update is part
of Boston’s commitment as a C40 member.
Mayor Martin Walsh attends the grand opening for Walker Park Apartments and Delphine’s Courtyard Pocket Park in
September 2019. The Walker Park Apartments are designed to a LEED Silver standard, equipped with high-efficiency
heating systems and Energy Star-rated appliances. Future City-funded affordable housing projects will be designed to a
Zero Net Carbon (ZNC) standard for healthier and greener affordable homes.
© John Wilcox
2019 Boston CAP Update | Introduction 13
Image by k_notgeil from Pixabay
14 2019 Boston CAP Update | Climate Action Across the City
CLIMATE ACTION
ACROSS THE CITY
Climate action is not an isolated endeavor. Rather, it is inextricably tied to many of the City’s wider social,
environmental and economic goals. For this reason, climate action is embedded in many other citywide
plans.
© Katherine Eshel
2019 Boston CAP Update | Climate Action Across the City 15
Imagine Boston 2030
The City’s first comprehensive plan in 50 years,
Imagine Boston 2030, sets a long-term vision for the
City and outlines goals towards economic growth,
increased affordability and equity, and climate
change preparedness for 2030. This plan highlights
some cross-cutting challenges and opportunities
related to climate change, as the City assesses
future policy, zoning, and other requirements in
response to Boston’s changing needs. Strategies
detailed in the report include steps towards
improving environmental quality and resiliency
of waterfront areas, enhancing energy efficiency
and security, as well as preparing Boston’s built
infrastructure and its residents for more frequent
and intense heat waves, extreme storms, and
flooding.
Resilient Boston
Urban resilience is the capacity of individuals,
communities, institutions, businesses, and systems
within a city to survive, thrive, adapt and grow no
matter what kinds of chronic stresses and acute
shocks they experience.11 Resilient Boston, the City’s
strategy for advancing resilience and racial equity,
began a community dialogue that resulted in four
long-term visions for Boston. One of the long-term
visions is a connected, adaptive city that will:
› Develop a redundant and reliable public
transportation network to provide equitable
accessibility for all Bostonians;
› Prepare for the impacts of climate change
and other threats while accelerating sustainable
infrastructure, environment, and communities; and
› Improve the collaboration of partners working in
Boston communities to address climate change
and other emergencies.
11 100 Resilient Cities, “What is Urban Resilience?,” accessed online 3 September 2019.
Go Boston 2030
The Go Boston 2030 Vision and Action Plan
establishes goals and actions related to the
transportation networks and assets in the City that
include:
› Expanding access of all modes of travel in
Boston’s neighborhoods;
› Improving safety related to transportation; and
› Ensuring reliability of Boston’s transit and
roadway networks.
The plan highlights the importance of increasing
the use of public transit in order to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, and incorporates
measures to ensure the resilience of our
transportation networks in light of projected
climate change impacts. The Action Plan details
58 projects and policies including transit and active
transportation projects that would contribute to
reductions in emissions.
Open Space and Recreation Plan 2015-2021
The Open Space and Recreation Plan presents
an inventory of existing open space throughout
the City. The Plan identified three central
challenges, one of which is climate change and
resilience, complementing the 2014 Climate
Action Plan. Objectives and actions related to
this challenge include:
› Evaluating opportunities for open space to serve
as protective infrastructure in coastal areas and
flood zones;
› Evaluating heat, energy use, and waste generation
related to City parks; and
› Developing best practices and performance
measures for green infrastructure in the City’s
open space sites.
16 2019 Boston CAP Update | Climate Action Across the City
Boston Housing 2030
In 2014, Boston released an updated housing
plan that supports neighborhood health, the
environment, community development, and
economic growth. This plan starts with the need
to build approximately 53,000 new housing units
to accommodate the projected population growth
by 2030, a task that would also create 51,000
construction jobs. A 2018 update increased the
housing construction goal to align with updated
population projections, and made a stronger
commitment to affordability, prevention of
displacement, and equitable housing access. The
plan now calls for 69,000 new units of housing at
a variety of income levels by 2030. That includes
nearly 16,000 new units of income-restricted
housing, which will bring Boston’s total number of
income-restricted units to 70,000. As the building
sector represents the single greatest contribution
to the city’s energy consumption and carbon
emissions, it is critical to ensure these new housing
units are built to a standard consistent with our
carbon neutrality goal. The City is promoting
Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) to reduce the
climate impact of new growth. Under the Boston
Housing 2030 plan, 64 percent of all new housing
production to date has been in highly transitaccessible areas (5 minute-walk to major transit),
compared to just 37 percent in the existing
housing stock.
BuildBPS
In September 2015, the city launched the BuildBPS
master plan process. The report, released in March
2017, outlines strategies to address much-needed
upgrades to the City’s educational facilities with
a long-range capital investment strategy. The
BuildBPS initiative focuses on reducing the number
of times students change schools from pre-K to
grade 12, increasing access to quality learning
centers, and siting new facilities in areas with
low access to educational resources. The Plan
adopted energy efficiency as a guiding principle
for new construction, and, as BPS improves
its existing facilities, identified climate control
and electrical upgrades, green roofs, and solar
and energy efficiency projects as opportunities
to create environments that are conducive to
learning, reduce operating costs, and demonstrate
leadership on climate.
Every summer for the past few years, Newbury Street becomes car-free open space on select weekends, as part of the
Open Newbury Street series.
© Jeremiah Robinson
2019 Boston CAP Update | Our Progress Since 2014 17
OUR PROGRESS
SINCE 2014
The Greenovate Boston 2014 Climate Action Plan Update — the second update to the original 2007 plan —
laid out 35 strategies and 98 actions, and set ambitious goals for 2020 and beyond. This section describes
some of the major initiatives taken to implement the plan. A more detailed progress report is available on
the City of Boston website.
Mayor Martin Walsh attends the opening of Martin's Park, a climate-resilient and inclusive park and play space is the
first of its kind in the City.
© John Wilcox
18 2019 Boston CAP Update | Our Progress Since 2014
CLIMATE READY BOSTON
Preparing for the impacts of climate change
12 City of Boston Climate Ready Boston Progress Tracker, accessible online.
In accordance with the
2014 Update , the City
launched the Climate
Ready Boston program
and released the
Climate Ready Boston
plan in December 2016.
Developed with support
from the Boston Green
Ribbon Commission and
other local partners, the
Climate Ready Boston plan included updated local
climate projections, a detailed vulnerability analysis,
and strategies to enhance our community’s
preparedness for climate change. The report
identified three major risks: sea level rise, extreme
heat, and extreme precipitation. The social
vulnerability analysis identified communities and
assets especially at risk from the impacts of climate
change, including people of color, low-income
people, women, youth, disabled people, people with
limited English proficiency and older residents. The
Climate Ready Boston plan included 11 strategies,
with 39 actions. The Climate Ready Boston progress
tracker is updated twice a year.12
We are working every day to be a Climate
Ready Boston. [...] We’re not just planning for
the next storm we will face — we’re planning
for storms the next generation will face.”
- Mayor Martin J. Walsh, 2018 remarks to the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce
The City launched the Climate Ready Dorchester process
to develop coastal resilience solutions for the
neighborhood at an open house in September 2019.
2019 Boston CAP Update | Our Progress Since 2014 19
Resilient Boston Harbor (above) is Mayor
Walsh’s climate-ready vision to enhance Boston’s
waterfront. Announced in the fall of 2018, Resilient
Boston Harbor shows how a network of accessible
open spaces and climate-ready buildings and
infrastructure will increase resilience to major
flooding events, while also increasing access and
open space area along the waterfront. Like all the
City’s current planning, it prepares the City for
40 inches of sea-level rise, expected around the
2070s. Furthering Mayor Walsh's vision are a
series of detailed neighborhood plans for coastal
resilience. Coastal resilience plans are complete
for parts of East Boston and Charlestown, for
South Boston, and are underway for Downtown,
the North End, and Dorchester.
The Boston Planning & Development Agency
(BPDA) has released coastal flood resilience design
guidelines that serve as a reference for residents,
business owners and developers to translate
flood resilience strategies into best practices. The
guidelines will also be used to administer a future
Coastal Flood Resilience Zoning Overlay District.
Recommendations for the Zoning Overlay District
have been developed and are under internal review
as of October 2019. The BPDA has also enacted the
Smart Utilities Policy to prepare Boston's utility
infrastructure for the impacts of climate change,
and to increase the uptake of green infrastructure,
district energy, and other smart technologies in
large new developments.
20 2019 Boston CAP Update | Our Progress Since 2014
GO BOSTON 2030
Reducing transportation emissions
Go Boston 2030 is
the City’s longterm plan to
transform Boston’s
transportation
system. In
accordance
with the 2014
Climate Action
Plan Update,
Go Boston 2030
adopted climate
responsiveness
as a guiding
principle and set goals to make Boston a city where
all residents have better and more equitable travel
choices, where efficient transportation networks
foster economic opportunity, and where the City
has taken steps to prepare for climate change.
By emphasizing accessibility, safety and reliability,
Go Boston 2030 will make it easier and more
attractive for Bostonians to go car-free. Actions
to shift travelers from driving alone to choosing
shared and active transportation modes will
make travel more efficient, reduce total vehicle
miles traveled in Boston, and help decrease our
transportation carbon emissions.
Since the plan’s adoption, the City has invested in
30 new staff positions and started implementing
many of the projects it laid out, including new bus
lanes along priority corridors, mobility hubs, and
key bike infrastructure connections.
The City of Boston has begun implementing Zero
Waste Boston strategies, including expanding
education and outreach campaigns around
recycling in partnership with institutions like the
New England Aquarium. The City is now developing
curbside composting and textile recycling programs
for residents.
CITIZEN SCIENCE IN BOSTON
In the summer of 2019, the Museum of Science
led a citizen science project to map the air
temperatures experienced by residents in the
summer. Dark, dense materials like asphalt in
cities absorb heat during the day and release
it back into the air at night, a phenomenon
known as the Urban Heat Island effect. Hot
summer nights can exacerbate the health effects
of daytime exposure to high temperatures by
disrupting sleep and increasing stress and
dehydration. With the help of the Museum of
Science, volunteers attached temperature sensors
to their cars and bikes to collect data in Boston,
Cambridge and Brookline. Partner scientists are
using the data to create a map of temperatures
that residents experience in their neighborhoods.
Source: Climate Ready Boston Map Explorer
2019 Boston CAP Update | Our Progress Since 2014 21
ZERO WASTE BOSTON
Making Boston a waste- and litter-free city
In June 2019, Mayor
Walsh released the
Zero Waste Boston
plan, completing
another action
from the 2014 plan.
The Zero Waste
Boston initiative
aims to divert at
least 80 percent
of the City’s waste
from landfills and
municipal solid
waste combustors
by 2035. The Zero Waste Boston strategies could
reduce carbon emissions from waste disposal by
60 percent.
Short- and long-term measures to become a
zero-waste city include:
› New services to handle capacity for increased
diversion (waste collection services, drop off
centers, transfer facilities);
› New rules to incentivize source reduction and
waste diversion activities (requirements, fees,
bans); and
› Education and outreach initiatives for residents
and businesses to adopt new activities (technical
assistance, behavior change marketing
campaigns, grants).
Boston residents can drop off residential food scraps
for composting in the Project Oscar bin outside City
Hall and four other locations. The City is developing a
curbside composting program for residents.
ZERO WASTE
BOSTON
REDUCE & REUSE
NI C
R
EASE
COMPOSTING
INSPIRE INNOVATION
RECYCLE
MORE
© Katherine Eshel
22 2019 Boston CAP Update | Our Progress Since 2014
GREENOVATE
BOSTON
Engaging Boston residents in climate action
Greenovate is Mayor Walsh’s initiative to empower
Boston residents to carry out community-level
action in support of Boston’s climate resilience,
carbon neutrality, and zero waste goals.
Greenovate’s mission is to expand the community
of people in Boston who are aware of, talking
about, and taking action on climate change.
Launched in 2017, the Greenovate Boston
Community Leaders program is increasing
awareness and understanding about the climate
impacts that Boston is facing, and involving
Bostonians in developing and advancing climate
actions to address it. To date, nearly 300
Bostonians have participated in the program.
Through their engagement and community
actions, the Leaders have reached more than
2,000 community members. Recently the program
added a new track for highly engaged residents to
participate as co-facilitators of the program and
serve as community ambassadors to the City’s
climate and energy planning.
Greenovate Boston maintains a climate action
guide for Boston residents to reduce their
carbon footprint at home, at work, in school and
around town. Newly developed behavior change
campaigns combine behavioral science and
marketing strategies will inform and motivate
actions by Boston residents that collectively
could produce significant carbon reductions.
13 Based on self-reported data from 750 buildings.
BUILDING ENERGY
REPORTING
Informing and supporting buildings to
reduce energy use
In April 2013, the City enacted the Building Energy
Reporting and Disclosure Ordinance (BERDO).
The ordinance requires that all commercial and
residential buildings that are 35,000 square feet
or have 35 units or more report their energy and
water use to the city each year. The City of Boston
then discloses this information on Analyze Boston,
the City’s open data platform. The City provides
outreach and support to help property owners and
the compliance rate reached 90 percent of square
feet in 2018. The BERDO data indicate that the first
cohort of buildings to start reporting reduced their
average energy use by 7 percent between 2014 and
2017.13
In addition to the reporting requirement, every
five years, buildings must show they have taken
action to reduce their energy use or emissions by
15 percent or conducted a detailed assessment of
options to reduce their energy use. In 2019, the
first cohort of buildings that began reporting to
BERDO are now completing the energy action and
assessment requirement.
Over 2,200 buildings are covered by BERDO.
These buildings account for over 258 million square
feet, or 34 percent of Boston’s total floor space,
as well as a significant proportion of Boston’s
carbon emissions.
2019 Boston CAP Update | Boston’s Carbon Footprint 23
The City of Boston has released an annual inventory of carbon emissions attributable to the City’s
residents and economic activity since 2005. The inventory allows the City to understand where our
emissions come from, quantify the potential impacts of programs and policies to reduce emissions, and
track progress towards our goals. The inventory accounts for emissions from energy use by residents,
businesses and other activities, on- and off-road transportation (excluding airplanes), and waste
management. To compile the inventory, we incorporate data from Boston utilities, data on fuel oil and
vehicle fuel consumption, and a combination of measured and modeled transportation data.
BOSTON’S CARBON
FOOTPRINT
© Bill Walker
24 2019 Boston CAP Update | Boston’s Carbon Footprint
Boston Community Carbon Emissions, 2005-2017, and Progress Towards Goals (in metric tons)
Since 2005, Boston’s emissions have decreased
by approximately 21 percent, from 7.9 to 6.1 million
metric tons of carbon. The reduction in Boston’s
emissions has occurred at the same time that
the population and the number of jobs in Boston
have increased. Per capita emissions have
decreased from 15 metric tons of carbon in 2005,
to 9 metric tons in 2017. Emissions per million
dollars of Gross City Product (GCP) have fallen
from 86 to 48 metric tons of carbon per million
dollars over the same period.
Almost all of the Boston community’s carbon
emissions stem from the building and
transportation sectors: buildings account for
71 percent of total emissions; transportation
accounts for nearly 29 percent of remaining
emissions. Boston is currently on track to meet
our 2020 carbon target.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT
SMALL RESIDENTIAL
19%
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL/ LARGE RESIDENTIAL
52%
<1%
FUGITIVE EMISSIONS
<1%
TRANSPORTATION
29%
Boston Carbon Emissions by Source, 2017
0
1M
2M
3M
4M
5M
6M
7M
8M
Straight Line to 2020 Goal Straight Line to 2050 Goal Total Emissions
2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
2019 Boston CAP Update | Boston’s Carbon Footprint 25
FACTORS DRIVING THE CHANGE
14 Based on total vehicle miles traveled and State reported combined gasoline and gasohol data from Federal Highway Administration, Highway Statistics
2005 and Highway Statistics 2017.
Approximately 45 percent of Boston’s emissions
reduction comes from the generation of cleaner
electricity. This is the result of state and regional
action to clean the New England electric grid, as
well as falling natural gas prices. The Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), a cap-and-trade
program for power plants in the Northeast, has
also helped make New England’s electricity cleaner.
Mandates to increase the amount of renewable
supply on the grid, like the Commonwealth's Clean
Energy Standard, will continue to support this
trend. By replacing coal and oil with natural gas
and, increasingly, renewables, New England power
generators are producing more electricity with less
carbon.
Fuel oil used for heating has also fallen by half
since 2005. More than 20,000 Boston households
have replaced fuel oil with cheaper, lower-carbon
natural gas or electric heating systems. As heating
systems are replaced, they can be upgraded with
more efficient systems, or switched to systems that
do not require the use of fossil fuels, like electric
air-source and air-to-water heat pumps.
Steam generation for the Kendall power station,
which supplies much of Downtown, has become
cleaner due to fuel-switching from oil to natural gas
and the addition of the Kendall cogeneration plant
in 2014. The Kendall plant previously discharged
hot process water directly into the Charles River,
but now recovers the energy for steam distribution.
The project not only cut the carbon intensity of
steam, but also reduced sulfur dioxide and nitrogen
oxide pollution.
Transportation emissions in Boston have held
steady, despite a growing number of jobs attracting
commuters to Boston. While the total miles driven
in Boston has increased, individual travelers are
driving fewer miles on average. Vehicles are also
getting better mileage. Thanks to federal standards,
the average fuel economy of Massachusetts vehicles
increased 17 percent between 2005 and 2017.14
Source of Carbon Reductions, 2005-2017
-200,000 0 200,000 400,000 600,000 800,000 1,000,000
More Driving (VMTs)
Better MPG (Fuel Economy)
Steam Use Reduction
Natural Gas Use Reduction
Heating Oil Use Reduction
Electricity Use Reduction
Cleaner Steam
Cleaner Electricity
Metric Tons of Carbon Reductions
Over 45 percent of past emissions reductions were due to a cleaner electricity grid, as power plants have switched from
coal and oil to gas.
26 2019 Boston CAP Update | Boston’s Carbon Footprint
PROGRESS TOWARDS OUR 2020 GOALS
The City of Boston has made progress towards the
goals set in the 2014 Climate Action Plan Update.
The Boston community is on track towards our
initial goal of reducing carbon emissions 25 percent
by 2020.
In 2017, our emissions had decreased 21 percent
from 2005 levels. We have also made progress
towards the other 2020 targets set in the 2014
Climate Action Plan Update:
2020 TARGETS ACHIEVED TO DATE
72,000 completed home energy audits 56,714 audits (79 percent of target) completed
through Mass Save between 2009 and Q2 of 2019
36,000 weatherizations, heating system
replacements or other significant upgrades
27,631 projects (77 percent of target) completed
through Mass Save between 2009 and Q2 of 2019
7 percent energy use reduction across all BERDO
buildings
7 percent average energy use reduction across the
first cohort of BERDO buildings from 2013 to 2017
15 percent of energy use from cogeneration 125 megawatts of co-generation installed through
2018
10 megawatts of commercial solar 15 megawatts (150 percent of target) installed since
2015
Improved fuel economy 17 percent improvement between 2005 and 2017
5.5 percent below 2005 vehicle miles traveled (VMT) Total VMT increased 14 percent while VMT per
capita decreased 14 percent between 2005 and
2017
The Kendall cogeneration plant (pictured to the left) delivers green steam to hundreds of buildings in downtown Boston.
© Katherine Eshel
2019 Boston CAP Update | Rising to the Carbon Neutrality Challenge 27
RISING TO THE
CARBON NEUTRALITY
CHALLENGE
While Boston is on track to meet our 2020 carbon target, we are not yet on a path to meet our 2050
carbon neutrality goal. That’s why this Climate Action Plan Update is advancing priority actions for
the next five years to put us on track for carbon neutrality. We will continue to work with our
residents and local businesses and institutions, as well as international, national and regional
partners, to implement our vision of a carbon-neutral Boston.
28 2019 Boston CAP Update | Rising to the Carbon Neutrality Challenge
GLOBAL LEADERSHIP AND REGIONAL
COLLABORATION
15 Commonwealth of Massachusetts, "Global Warming Solutions Act 10-Year Progress Report," April 2019.
The City of Boston is on the forefront of climate
action. In 2017, Mayor Walsh, joined a bipartisan
coalition of 3,500 leaders in government, business,
faith, and cultural institutions, to sign the “We Are
Still In” declaration, pledging Boston’s continued
support for the Paris Climate Agreement, even as the
U. S. President announced his intention to withdraw
the United States from the agreement. Boston is
also committed to meeting the Paris goals as a
member of the Global Covenant of Mayors (GCoM)
for Climate and Energy, an international alliance of
cities and local governments that facilitates local
partnerships, fosters a network of information
sharing and publicly reports progress on carbon
reduction and climate preparedness efforts.
Boston also participates in national and
international networks dedicated to sharing
lessons learned and collaborating with cities
across the globe. In 2014, Boston joined the C40
Cities Climate Leadership Group, an international
network of cities that are committed to action to
address climate change through sustainable and
quantifiable approaches. Mayor Walsh is a member
of C40's steering committee. The City of Boston is
also one of the founders the Urban Sustainability
Directors Network (USDN), which enables peer-topeer learning and joint projects among more than
180 North American cities.
The City of Boston works with partners in state
government to further our common climate
goals. The Global Warming Solutions Act is the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts’ framework
legislation to reduce carbon emissions across the
state by 80 percent from 2005 levels by 2050. Recent
reports indicate that statewide carbon emissions in
2016 were 21 percent below the 1990 level.15 In 2019,
the Commonwealth launched the "80x50 Study" to
assess a suite of mid- and long-term policies for the
Commonwealth to best meet its 2050 goal.
Mayor Walsh participates in a panel discussion with
Mayor Turner of Houston, Mayor Garcetti of Los
Angeles, and Mayor Rogero of Knoxville, during the 2018
International Mayors Climate Summit in Boston.
We are America’s
climate champion,
with a target
date of 2050 for
going 100 percent
carbon-neutral.”
- Mayor Martin J. Walsh, State of the City 2017
© Isabel Leon
2019 Boston CAP Update | Rising to the Carbon Neutrality Challenge 29
The City of Boston and the 14 other neighboring
cities and towns in the Metropolitan Mayors
Coalition (MMC) collaborate on climate change
issues that are affecting, and will continue to
impact, communities in the region. In 2017, all MMC
municipalities committed to achieving net-zero
carbon emissions by 2050. Their actions range from
expanding electric vehicle charging infrastructure
to implementing community-wide zero-waste plans
to adopting green building zoning requirements.
The MMC cities and towns have also committed to
coordinating climate preparedness efforts.
ENGAGING RESIDENTS
AND LOCAL
STAKEHOLDERS IN
CLIMATE ACTION
For the 2019 Update, we broadly engaged the
community to make sure our climate strategies
reflect our values and work for everyone. Making
our city carbon neutral and climate ready needs
the help of all Boston residents, community groups,
businesses, cultural institutions, and other local
and metro area stakeholders. The City of Boston
needs partners to collaborate on new programs and
policies, and to innovate and take action within their
own communities and industries.
A street team engaged more than 1,400 residents and
commuters in the 2019 Climate Action Plan Update.
More than 70 organizations participated in the working
group that helped to develop this Plan.
© Katherine Eshel
30 2019 Boston CAP Update | Rising to the Carbon Neutrality Challenge
A Street Team of Boston youth and residents
engaged residents and commuters throughout
Boston and learned about their climate action
priorities, challenges, and needs. More than
10 community-based organizations supported
the Street Team by recruiting participants and
distributing information and surveys to their
membership. By taking climate action engagement
into Boston’s neighborhoods, the Street Team
engaged communities whose voices are often
underrepresented in climate action planning,
including:
› Black, Latinx, and other communities of color;
› Low-income communities;
› Community college and vocational school
students;
› Renters;
› Small business owners (especially minority- and
women-owned businesses); and
› Youth.
The City of Boston assembled a community
Working Group to help identify key strategies
and develop roadmaps for them. The Working
Group included representatives of community
groups, environmental justice and environmental
advocacy groups, labor unions, student
associations, developers, real estate and
architecture associations, green construction
companies, transportation service providers,
regional agencies, neighboring municipalities,
faith-based organizations, academic and cultural
institutions, and more.
Moving forward, the Greenovate Boston program
will continue to raise awareness and provide
resources for residents to live sustainably,
train residents to lead climate action in their
communities, and connect Bostonians to
engagement and volunteer opportunities
with the City.
The City will also continue to engage civic, business
and institutional leaders in climate action, building
on existing partnerships with organizations such as
the Boston Green Ribbon Commission.
Continuing our tradition of partnership and
education around climate in Boston ensures that
we can transform our community to become a
carbon-neutral Boston that is healthy, thriving
and resilient.
2019 CAP UPDATE COMMUNITY
PARTICIPATION BY THE NUMBERS
› More than 70 organizations participated in the
Working Group, which met four times.
› 20 Boston youth and other residents, including
fluent Spanish, Haitian Creole and Mandarin
Chinese speakers, received training and
participated in the Street Team.
› The Street Team attended 19 community events
and engaged more than 1,400 residents and
commuters, collecting more than 700 survey
responses and conducting 16 interviews with small
businesses, 14 of which were minority- and/or
women-owned.
2019 Boston CAP Update | 2020-2024 Carbon Reduction Plan 31
Mayor Walsh has set a goal of making Boston carbon neutral by 2050. This plan focuses on
strategies to accelerate emissions reductions from Boston’s buildings, transportation
systems, and energy supply.
2020-2024 CARBON
REDUCTION PLAN
32 2019 Boston CAP Update | 2020-2024 Carbon Reduction Plan
ABOUT THE CARBON FREE
BOSTON REPORT
Mayor Walsh commissioned the Carbon Free
Boston report from the Boston Green Ribbon
Commission (GRC) in 2017. The analysis, led by
the Boston University Institute for Sustainable
Energy (ISE), assessed policy and existing
technology options to decarbonize Boston’s
buildings, transportation, waste and energy
sectors by 2050. The report, released early in
2019, presented pathways to carbon neutrality
for the four sectors, as well as a framework
to approach carbon offsets. The report was
followed up with a social equity report and
sector-specific technical reports.
The Carbon Free Boston analysis concluded
that to reach carbon neutrality, Boston must:
› Reduce demand for energy by increasing
efficiency;
› Convert nearly everything that runs on fossil
fuels to run on electricity; and
› Buy 100 percent carbon-free electricity.
For buildings, the analysis indicated that
adopting a Zero Net Carbon standard for new
construction by 2030, and retrofitting and
electrifying at least 80 percent of existing
buildings are essential steps. In transportation,
measures from the Go Boston 2030 plan to
shift travelers from driving alone to shared
and active modes are key to reduce vehicle
miles traveled (VMT) and energy needs; Carbon
Free Boston then found that all remaining
drivers will need to switch to electric or other
zero-emissions vehicles. The strategies laid out
in Zero Waste Boston, our zero-waste plan, can
decrease 78 percent of annual direct emissions
from waste disposal.
Based on findings from the Carbon Free Boston
analysis and input from the community working group
and other stakeholders, the 2019 Update details the
most impactful strategies to help Boston meet its
2030 and 2050 carbon reduction goals. In particular,
it focuses on key steps for the building, transportation
and energy sectors over the next five years.
In order to ensure that climate action results in
positive outcomes for all Bostonians, the 2019 Update
process involved both an inclusive public engagement
approach and a community-based working group. As
we implement these strategies, the City of Boston will
work with people of color, low-income communities,
and other socially vulnerable communities, to achieve
fair outcomes for all Bostonians.
Carbon Free
Boston
Summary Report 2019
The Carbon Free Boston analysis is the technical backbone of
the 2019 Climate Action Plan Update.
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 33
Boston’s buildings account for approximately 71 percent of our community carbon emissions, and represent
the greatest opportunity for emissions reductions. Decarbonizing Boston’s building sector depends on
shifting to zero net carbon (ZNC) new construction by 2030, and retrofitting and electrifying at least 80
percent of our existing buildings over the next 30 years.
BUILDINGS
© E. Huybrechts
34 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
The 2,200 largest buildings represent about
34 percent of Boston’s total floor area and account
for close to half of our total emissions. The
remaining building emissions come from 84,000
buildings. In many cases, smaller buildings may be
easier to make carbon neutral now, but the largest
buildings typically have more management and
financial resources. Therefore, large and small
buildings require different strategies and tools.
In a carbon-neutral building sector, all new
development needs to be ZNC or energy positive.
Since 2014, the City of Boston has seen 4 to 6 million
square feet per year of new building space.
By 2050, Boston is expected to add 122 million
square feet of new development. By shifting to ZNC
new construction, building developers prevent the
need for high-cost retrofits in the future. Timing
matters. Adopting a ZNC standard by 2030 would
cut 17 percent of cumulative emissions from new
construction to 2050; adoption by 2023 would
cut another 17 percent. The shift to ZNC building
standards will also need to ensure that all ZNC
development is resilient, and that ZNC residential
development is inclusionary and affordable. The
City of Boston can build on existing green building
zoning requirements, including Article 37 of the
Zoning Code.
Boston has more than
estimated
amount of
emissions
from Boston
buildings in
2017
Estimated number of buildings that need to undergo deep
energy retrofits and be electrified by 2050
86,000buildings
CO2
e
4.3MMT
15%
80%
of additional
floorspace from new
construction by 2050
New buildings need to be built to a
zero net carbon standard by 2030
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 35
For existing buildings, widespread deep energy
retrofits and fossil fuel-free heating and hot water
systems are the most effective carbon reduction
strategies. 85 percent of floorspace that will exist
in 2050 has already been built. To reach carbon
neutrality, four out of five buildings in Boston
will need to implement deep energy retrofits and
electrification by 2050. Deep energy retrofits can
reduce citywide emissions by up to 40 percent
using commercially available technologies. The
City of Boston will lead by example by retrofitting
municipal buildings, and will require private
building owners to reduce their building emissions
by introducing carbon performance standards.
Both steps leverage existing incentives in state
programs such as Mass Save. The work necessary
to retrofit Boston’s buildings has the potential
to support the local economy and expand local
career opportunities in energy efficiency and
construction. It will also be important to develop
anti-displacement strategies, specific strategies
for affordable housing and historic buildings, and
flexible compliance mechanisms.
WHAT ARE ZERO NET ENERGY
(ZNE) AND ZERO NET CARBON
(ZNC) BUILDINGS?
A ZNE building is a low-energy building that meets
all of its annual energy needs with on-site renewable
energy. ZNE buildings are typically connected to
the electric grid. Some buildings are even energypositive (E+) and deliver surplus energy to the grid.
A ZNC building is a low-energy fossil fuel-free
building that meets its annual energy needs from
a mix of on- and off-site renewable energy assets.
Even with on-site renewable energy generation,
larger and more energy-intensive buildings, like
medical or laboratory facilities, may require off-site
renewable energy delivered by the grid to be ZNC.
ZNE and ZNC buildings employ better insulated
roofs and walls, better windows, and smaller,
more efficient, fossil fuel-free heating, cooling, and
ventilating systems to reduce energy loads. In new
construction, cost savings from smaller systems
offset other additional costs, enabling ZNE and ZNC
buildings to be delivered for little or no added cost.
Low energy buildings with renewable energy and
energy storage are more resilient and reduce stress
on the electric grid.
A ZNC building code would establish better standards
for low-energy buildings and on-site renewable
energy systems.
36 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO CARRY
OUT A DEEP ENERGY RETROFIT
AND ELECTRIFY A BUILDING?
Deep energy retrofits achieve at least a 50 percent
energy use reduction by:
› Upgrading mechanical systems, lighting systems,
and appliances;
› Insulating walls, roofs, crawlspaces, and
foundations;
› Upgrading HVAC and plumbing;
› Replacing windows;
› Air sealing; and
› Installing renewable energy systems where
possible.
Electrification means converting fossil fuel systems
to electric equivalents. For example, a building owner
could replace a fuel oil boiler with a heat pump. By
combining deep energy retrofits with electrification
and clean energy procurement, existing buildings
can become carbon neutral.
Decarbonizing Boston’s buildings requires a
favorable regulatory context. The City of Boston
will work with state, regional and local partners
to support a building sector-wide shift toward
energy-efficient practices and fossil fuel-free
building systems and programs that connect
Boston residents, women, people of color and
youth to careers in green building and operations.
The City will also advocate for state-level policy and
program changes, including a ZNC building code
and improvements to utility incentive programs, to
better support our carbon neutrality goal.
The City of Boston will pursue the following
strategies to reduce building emissions over the
next five years:
1. Construct new municipal buildings to a zero net
carbon standard
2.Adopt a zero net carbon standard for City-funded
affordable housing in Boston
3.Strengthen green building zoning requirements
to a zero net carbon standard
4.Invest in energy efficiency and renewable energy
generation in municipal buildings
5.Develop a carbon emissions performance
standard to decarbonize existing large buildings
6.Expand workforce development programs for
building decarbonization
7. Advocate for state building policies that align
with carbon neutrality by 2050
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 37
CONSTRUCT NEW MUNICIPAL
BUILDINGS TO A ZERO NET CARBON 1 STANDARD
The City of Boston will strengthen its new
municipal building requirements to a multi-tiered
Zero Net Carbon (ZNC) standard. This standard
will significantly reduce or completely eliminate
the use of fossil fuels in future City buildings.
By implementing this multi-tiered ZNC standard,
along with high-efficiency climate and lighting
systems, and efficient building enclosures,
consumption of energy generated by fossil fuels will
be significantly reduced, if not totally eliminated.
Because municipal buildings account for threequarters of carbon emissions from local municipal
operations, higher standards for building energy
performance are essential to reach the Mayor’s
goal, and prepare Boston and its residents for
future challenges. In the next few years, the City
will look to apply a similar standard to large-scale
building renovations.
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Up to 17,000 tons of annual carbon
emissions avoided from municipal
activities
Improved air quality in and around the
buildings leading to better and healthier
environments
Provides ZNC examples for other
sectors and neighboring municipalities
BOSTON’S ZNC STANDARD
There are four tiers that comprise the City’s
established ZNC standard. The City will, upon
individual project evaluation, target the most
stringent tier possible. Each of these tiers is
reliant on a carefully engineered, high-efficiency
mechanical system and building enclosure.
› ZNC-onsite: a ZNC-onsite building is one
that is optimally efficient, has no onsite fossil
fuel combustion, and over the course of a year,
generates renewable energy onsite in a quantity
equal to or greater than the total amount of
energy consumed onsite.
› ZNC-offsite: in contrast to ZNC onsite, this
option allows for energy from offsite renewable
sources to be included. Such fuel sources could
include the purchase of renewable energy
credits (RECs), or participation in a clean power
purchase agreement (PPA).
› ZNC-ready: a building that is ZNC-ready
would become ZNC (either onsite or offsite)
when its electricity is supplied by 100 percent
renewable sources.
› ZNC-convertible: a building that uses electricity
supplemented with some onsite fossil fuel use
(e.g., combined heat and power), but that can be
readily changed over to 100 percent renewable
energy sources upon availability.
38 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
ADOPT A ZERO NET CARBON
STANDARD FOR CITY-FUNDED 2 AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN BOSTON
The City of Boston will create and implement
zero net carbon (ZNC) emissions guidelines for
the construction of new affordable housing in
Boston. These guidelines will increase the baseline
requirements for new construction to a net-zero
emissions standard in 2020, and extend it over the
next few years to the retrofit of existing buildings.
Housing a Changing City, a comprehensive plan that
addresses the housing needs of Boston’s growing
population, sets a goal of creating 69,000 new
units of housing at a variety of income levels across
the city. This includes nearly 16,000 new units
of income-restricted housing, bringing Boston’s
total number of income-restricted units to 70,000
by 2030. The plan also points out the benefits of
lowered utility costs and increased environmental
health that can be provided by zero net carbon
and energy-positive homes. This is particularly
important since utility costs in Boston are among
the highest nationally, and disproportionately
impact households that are cost-burdened.
DESIGNING FOR EQUITY
› Prioritize resources to ensure those living in
affordable housing are among the first to receive
the benefits of clean and energy efficient homes
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› 100 percent of new publicly funded affordable
housing built after 2020 is ZNC or ZNC-ready
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Avoided carbon emissions from new
construction
Reduced maintenance costs
Increased access to renewable energy
through on-site generation
Health benefits from improved indoor
air quality and level of comfort
Reduction in energy costs for
households
Energy-positive townhomes in Roxbury produce more
energy than they need, thanks to energy-efficient design
and on-site solar generation.
© Katherine Eshel
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 39
STEPS TIMELINE
New construction 1. Release Department of Neighorhood Development (DND)
Guidelines for Zero Emissions Buildings
2019
2.Identify high-carbon intensive building materials to avoid and
suggest greener, alternative materials
2019-2020
3.Give special consideration in 2019 funding round to Zero Emission
Buildings
2019
4.Update DND Request for Proposals (RFP) language to reflect new
Zero Emission Building standards
2020
5.Connect facilities managers to Building Operator Training
programs
Ongoing
Existing buildings 1. Assess existing affordable housing stock and strategies for deep
energy retrofits with combined electrification
2020
2.Partner with affordable housing providers and residents to
demonstrate and develop deep energy retrofit technologies
(panelization systems, compact highly efficient mechanical
systems, etc.) and processes by performing deep energy retrofits
on properties across the city
Starting 2020
3.Develop design guidelines for deep energy retrofits with
electrification
• Assess incremental cost and evaluate financial resource needs
• Integrate resilience strategies into these guidelines for areas at
risk to flooding, increased heat, other extreme weather events
By 2022
4.Update RFP language to reflect deep energy retrofit and
electrification strategies
By 2022
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
› In 2011, the City launched the E+ Green Building
Program. This program has demonstrated the
feasibility of energy positive multi-family homes
in Boston’s neighborhoods with over 14 units
completed and more than 100 in the pipeline
including affordable housing in Dorchester,
Jamaica Plain, Mission Hill and Roxbury.
COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION
› Produce design workshops for affordable housing
architects and developers to present and discuss
the City’s proposed pathways for achieving zero
net carbon buildings
› Partner to develop workforce training program
to educate contractors, project managers, and
developers on air-sealing, framing, and other
best practices for Zero Emissions building
40 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
STRENGTHEN GREEN BUILDING ZONING
REQUIREMENTS TO A ZERO NET 3 CARBON STANDARD
Building on existing resources and tools, the City
will expand and strengthen its green building
requirements to a zero net carbon (ZNC) standard
in order to accelerate towards our 2050 carbon
neutrality goal.
A ZNC standard requires that buildings emit no
net carbon emissions. A ZNC building has an
airtight, well-insulated exterior envelope and
smaller, more efficient all-electric or carbon-free
heating, cooling, and hot water systems. There are
no on-site fossil fuel systems. Combined with onsite renewable generation and off-site renewable
energy purchases, ZNC buildings with efficient
envelopes and no fossil fuel systems can run
entirely on clean, renewable energy, thus bringing
their annual carbon emissions down to zero.
To strengthen its green building requirements, the
Boston Planning & Development Agency (BPDA)
will lead a public process to develop new zoning.
As part of that work, the BPDA will work with other
key City departments and engage the building
sector and community.
DESIGNING FOR EQUITY
› Prioritize energy-positive (E+) ZNC projects
in low-income and environmental justice
communities
› Develop mechanisms to mitigate issues related to
affordability, gentrification and displacement of
low-income renters
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› 100 percent of developments covered by the
policy are built to a ZNC standard
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Up to a 19 percent reduction in total
annual building emissions from business
as usual
Increased thermal comfort and indoor
air quality improvements for building
occupants
Avoided costs of deep energy retrofits
to comply with future performance
standards
Lower operating costs for building
owners and lower energy bills for
tenants and occupants
COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION
› Public awareness campaigns and recognition
programs explaining the benefits of ZNC
buildings and celebrating practice leaders
including partnering with local professional
organizations and advocacy groups
› Workshops and training on ZNC design,
engineering, and construction practices and their
benefits and opportunities for building owners,
developers, contractors, inspectors and endusers
› Public outreach to residents, businesses,
property owners, and design and real estate
stakeholders in the development - and later, the
implementation - of zoning recommendations
and design guidelines
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 41
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS &
PARTNERS
1. Require that building developers submit a CarbonNeutral Building Assessment as part of Article 37 zoning
review requirements
2019 BPDA, City
2.Promote new ZNC buildings in the Boston area to
improve knowledge of ZNC costs and best practices
Ongoing BPDA, in partnership
with developers,
architects and
engineers, academic
institutions, energyfocused community
organizations
3.Launch technical analysis and public process to:
• Assess the feasibility of ZNC standards for building
types and develop timeline for implementation
• Assess on-site renewable energy practices and
standards and procurement of off-site renewable
energy
• Explore extending green building requirements to
small project review (developments between 20,000
and 50,000 square feet)
• Develop zoning recommendations for a ZNC standard
2019-2020 BPDA, City, technical
experts, industry
stakeholders,
utilities, community
groups
4.Enact new zoning requirements and timeline for
implementation
2020 BPDA
5.Evaluate the creation of a carbon linkage fee Starting 2020 City, BPDA
6.Communicate, educate, and oversee compliance of ZNC
building requirements
Starting 2021 BPDA, City, industry
associations,
community groups
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
› Article 37 of the Boston Zoning Code currently
requires that all new construction subject
to Article 80 Large Project Review (generally
50,000 square feet and over) meet minimum
sustainability standards, using the LEED rating
system. This system awards a range of points
for energy performance, connectivity to
transit, indoor air quality, construction waste
management, and in other environmental
impact realms. The Article 37 review process
also includes a sustainability narrative, a climate
change resiliency checklist and coordination with
the Smart Utilities Policy.
› In 2011, the City adopted the Massachusetts
Stretch Energy Code, which sets higher building
energy efficiency and performance standards
above the state’s Base Building Energy Code.
In June 2019, the Board of Building Regulations
and Standards instructed their Energy Advisory
Committee to recommend ways in which to
incorporate net-zero energy provisions into the
energy code.
42 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
The Renew Boston Trust is the City’s initiative to
finance energy efficiency in municipal buildings.
The City of Boston invests in energy conservation
measures in its buildings, then pays itself back
using the money saved on our energy bills, which is
guaranteed by the City’s contractor. This creative
financing allows the City to move more quickly to
make municipal buildings more efficient. The first
phase of the Renew Boston Trust included energy
conservation measures at 14 municipal buildings
and solar-generated electricity at three sites.
The City will also work to coordinate self-funding
energy conservation measures with planned
capital improvements to maximize the impact
of our investments. In particular, this financing
approach will support BuildBPS, the Mayor’s
comprehensive initiative to modernize schools
and build new school buildings. The Renew Boston
Trust invested $10 million in Phase 1, and will
invest an additional $10 million in Phase 2 and
$25 million in Phase 3.
DESIGNING FOR EQUITY
› The City will work with its contractor to expand
outreach to minority contractors and increase
compliance with the Boston Resident Jobs Policy.
› By investing in energy efficiency, we will make
indoor air temperatures more comfortable for
students and teachers in Boston’s public schools,
as well as for City employees across municipal
buildings.
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Phase 1: 1 percent reduction in annual
municipal carbon emissions, $600,000
in energy savings per year
Phase 2+: additional emissions
reductions and energy savings (size
to be determined)
Health and comfort benefits of heating,
ventilation and air conditioning
upgrades in municipal buildings,
including fire stations and schools
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
› In 2018, the City piloted Building Operator
Certification (BOC) training to ensure facility
operators from Boston and surrounding
municipalities are equipped to make Cityowned buildings perform at their highest level.
Additional municipal BOC trainings are planned.
In partnership with the Massachusetts Clean
Energy Center, the Renew Boston Trust will install
battery energy storage at the Boston Fire Training
Academy on Moon Island. This new equipment
will increase the resilience of the facility, as well as
provide recruits with the opportunity to train with
energy storage systems. The Trust will also install
solar thermal water heating systems at Boston
Fire Department stations elsewhere in the city.
INVEST IN ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 4 GENERATION IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 43
STEPS TIMELINE
1. Complete Phase 1 projects 2019-2020
2.Select building portfolio and carry out energy assessments for Phase 2 2019
3.Explore developing a separate energy service contract for streetlights 2020
4.Complete design and begin installation of Phase 2 energy conservation measures By mid-2020
5.Select building portfolio, including schools, and carry out energy assessments for
Phase 3
By late 2020
6.Secure funding and begin early scoping for Phase 4 By 2021
7. Complete design and begin installation of Phase 3 energy conservation measures By early 2021
The City of Boston has installed solar panels on the roof of the Roslindale Community Center through the Renew Boston
Trust program.
44 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
The City of Boston will develop and introduce
a performance standard to reduce carbon
emissions from Boston’s existing large buildings.
Just 2,200 of Boston’s largest buildings represent
about 34 percent of Boston’s total floorspace and
approximately half of our total emissions.
The standard will require that all buildings larger
than a certain threshold meet fixed carbon targets
that decrease over time. Performance standards
specific to different building typologies will
ensure that buildings make steady progress on
emissions reductions, while allowing building
owners to develop solutions that are cost-effective
and appropriate for the building’s use. The new
standard will build on the reporting requirement
of the Building Energy Reporting and Disclosure
Ordinance (BERDO), and replace the current energy
action and assessment requirement.
The City will work with partners to develop case
studies and foster best practices throughout the
Boston region. This includes sharing lessons from
demonstrations of deep energy retrofits and thermal
electrification in different building types. The City
will also collaborate with neighboring municipalities
and other partners to improve technical and
financial assistance for building owners.
DESIGNING FOR EQUITY
› Explore ways to enable affordable housing to
reduce emissions, while avoiding passing on
retrofit costs to tenants. Include affordable
housing, small business, environmental justice
organizations, and community groups in the
policy advisory group
› Develop mechanisms to support affordable
housing and small business upgrades
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Avoided carbon emissions
Energy savings due to enhanced building
efficiency
Increased thermal comfort and indoor
air quality for building occupants
RETROFITTING HISTORIC BUILDINGS
› More than half of Boston’s buildings were built
before 1950. These older and historic structures
are located throughout the city, and many are
integral to Boston’s character and vibrancy.
› Retrofitting historic buildings reduces material
consumption and emits less carbon than
demolishing buildings and constructing new
ones, even if the new structure is Zero Net
Carbon (ZNC). Historic buildings have embodied
carbon in them that is lost if a building or its
components are demolished. They are often
relatively energy efficient, with passive heating,
cooling and lighting systems.
› The City will develop pathways and guidelines
for property owners to decarbonize and prepare
their older buildings for the effects of climate
change, while preserving the historic character
of the structures.
5
DEVELOP A CARBON EMISSIONS
PERFORMANCE STANDARD TO
DECARBONIZE EXISTING LARGE
BUILDINGS
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 45
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS & PARTNERS
1. Introduce a building performance scorecard for
BERDO buildings
End of
2019
City
2.Launch the technical analysis and public process to
develop a building emissions performance standard
• Develop framework to set mandatory carbon
emissions targets by building type that decrease
over time
• Evaluate alternative compliance fund that can be
used to support affordable housing retrofits or
community energy projects
• Develop pathways for affordable housing, historic
properties, and other building types as needed to
achieve performance targets
• Evaluate lowering the size threshold for buildings
covered by the standard (currently 35,000 square
feet under BERDO)
By 2020 City, in consultation with
building sector, techincal
experts, community development
corporations (CDCs), communitybased organizations, and other
stakeholders
3.Expand financing mechanisms for retrofits,
including exploring the creation of a local climate
bank
Starting
2020
City
4.Engage with utility companies to improve the
process for building owners to obtain and report
their energy data
Ongoing City
5.Develop guidance for combined deep energy
retrofits and electrification, including for historic
buildings
By 2021 City, community groups, industry
associations
6.Propose amendment to BERDO to replace energy
action and assessment requirement with the
building emissions performance standard
By 2021 City
7. Pilot deep energy retrofits with thermal
electrification in the 15 Carbon Free Boston building
typologies to provide sector-specific case studies
• Collaborate with local industry and professional
associations to share lessons learned
2020-2024 City, building owners, philanthropy,
community groups, industry and
professional associations
8.Study mechanisms to improve the energy
efficiency of existing buildings not covered by
the standard, including rental and time of sale
scorecards, rental energy efficiency requirements,
and other measures.
2020-2024 City, policy experts, building
owners, industry associations,
community groups
46 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› 100 percent reduction in annual carbon emissions
from large buildings in 2050
› 100 percent of covered buildings reach
their carbon targets or complete alternative
compliance payment
EXISTING EFFORTS AND TOOLS
› Since 2013, the Building Energy Reporting and
Disclosure Ordinance (BERDO) requires all midand large-size buildings to track their energy and
water usage. These buildings must also complete
an energy assessment or an energy action every
five years.
› The City of Boston’s Renew Boston Trust uses
energy performance contracts to finance energy
efficiency measures in municipal buildings. The
City is receiving support from the Bloomberg
American Cities Climate Challenge to support
similar models for Boston’s nonprofit institutions.
› The Environment Department released the
Resilient, Historic Buildings Design Guide in
August 2018 to illustrate resilience strategies
that can be incorporated into the preservation
of historic properties. Similar guidance will
be developed for carbon-neutral retrofits of
landmarks and historic buildings.
› Mass Save, an initiative sponsored by
Massachusetts’ utilities to enable residents,
businesses and institutions to make energy
efficiency upgrades, offers a wide range of energy
efficiency services, rebates, incentives, trainings,
and information. The City implements outreach
programs to connect residents and businesses
in Boston to Mass Save and help them take full
advantage of these incentives. The Mass Save
program is funded by a charge on customers’
gas and electricity bills.
COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION
› To support building owners as they undertake
deep energy retrofits and switch to clean energy
sources, Boston will work with neighboring
municipalities and state partners to develop a
building decarbonization support program to
connect buildings to technical and financial
resources, as well as provide building performance
scorecards. The City of Boston will collaborate
with Mass Save to communicate energy saving
and financing opportunities to building owners
and operators.
Boston Properties implemented extensive energy
conservation measures at 200 Clarendon Street, previously
the John Hancock Tower. The Energy Star score improved
from 38 to 83 over five years, saving the property millions
of dollars in utility costs each year.
© Katherine Eshel
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 47
The City of Boston will work to support and
enhance existing training programs and programs
to increase the diversity in the building trades
through upskilling and incumbent worker
training. Many Boston-based high schools and
higher education institutions offer certifications
and degrees in facilities management and green
building technologies, and connect students
to careers in Boston. Local programs connect
youth, women, and people of color with career
opportunities in the building trades. Trade unions
also offer programs to train incumbent workers
and increase diversity in the trades. Since it is
important to balance training programs with job
matching, the City will explore ways to expand
job fairs and boards for building construction
and operation, and to connect contractors with
building projects.
Today, more than 62,000 people work in energy
efficiency jobs in the Boston metro area.16
Approximately 80 percent buildings in Boston will
need to undergo deep energy retrofits and prepare
for the impacts of climate change. To carry out that
work, Boston needs to grow the pipeline of Boston’s
future green builders and hone the skills of our
active labor force. This includes:
› Facilities management. Building operators,
maintenance workers and building automation
controls experts all play a vital part in ensuring
that buildings run at peak performance.
› Construction trades. Every tradesperson
involved in building renovations - electricians,
carpenters, roofers, plumbers, HVAC technicians,
16 E2 (Environmental Entrepreneurs), “Clean Jobs Cities 2018,” September 2018.
estimators, pipefitters and more - will need to
understand what a deep energy retrofit entails
and become familiar with electric building
systems, to allow buildings to reduce their
emissions.
To support and enhance the work of local and
regional institutions, trade unions and non-profit
partners, the City will also convene key players to
develop a citywide strategy, coordinate the efforts
of current workforce development programs, and
ensure the building sector is ready to retrofit and
operate carbon-neutral buildings.
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Creation of local, well-paying, highquality jobs
Local economic investment
Enhanced employment security
(through new trade skills development)
Increasingly diverse workforce in the
building professions
Improved building performance and
sharing of best practices as industry
knowledge and workforce for net zero
carbon buildings advances
6 EXPAND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMS FOR BUILDING
DECARBONIZATION
48 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
DESIGNING FOR EQUITY
› The City of Boston will continue to build a
diverse, inclusive workforce of people of color,
women, recent immigrants, veterans, and young
professionals.
› Job training programs should be designed to
accommodate different skill sets and educational
levels and should be financially accessible to all
Boston residents.
› High-quality job opportunities in this field
need to be accessible and fairly distributed.
Living wages and appropriate benefits should
be provided, as well as opportunities for career
advancement. Wherever possible, employers
should give workers a voice in formulating
policies, enforcing wage and hour rules, and
protecting against wage theft.
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› Construction work hours on public and large
private projects performed by:
• Boston residents: 51 percent
• Women: 12 percent
• People of color: 40 percent
› 50 percent of individuals who begin training go
on to graduate from or complete training
› 75 percent placement rate into jobs or additional
training for individuals who complete training
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS AND PARTNERS
1. Regularly convene an internal City working group
on workforce development for energy efficiency
and green buildings to:
• Coordinate citywide programming
• Develop an equitable workforce development
strategy that builds on the Regional Infrastructure
Jobs Plan, including marketing and outreach
• Convene stakeholder and community roundtables
around specific topics as needed
• Collaborate with industry partners and
stakeholders to advertise and scale training
programs
• Coordinate with local municipalities, regional
agencies and Mass Save
Starting
2019
City and stakeholders, including
trade unions, construction
companies, community colleges,
regional partners, universities,
non-profit and community-based
organizations.
2.Estimate baseline and future construction labor
needs to meet carbon neutrality goals
• Inventory career ladder and training programs for
union and open shop workers, including for those
without a high school diploma
• Identify labor and training gaps
2019-2020 City, technical experts
3.Pilot and coordinate training programs and support
partner-led programs, including:
• A training course to develop the capacity of
MWDBE contractors to bid on municipal and
large-scale projects
• Building Operator Certification training programs
Starting
2019
City, in partnership with local and
regional non-profits and industry
associations
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 49
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS AND PARTNERS
4.Develop facilities management training and job
opportunities for municipal building staff
• Explore adding a facilities management track to
City Academy
• Increase the number of municipal building
operators with Building Operator Certification
• Develop training and advancement opportunities
for incumbent maintenance staff
2020-2021 City
5.Expand technical offerings and career pathways in
Boston Public Schools
• Support and enhance existing programs at career
and technical education (CTE) high schools
• Apply for state grant to offer a new pre-college
green building innovation pathway at nontechnical schools
• Expand access to technical courses (e.g., afterschool carpentry program accessible to all
students)
• Expand summer internship opportunities through
the Building Boston’s Future program
Starting in
2020
City, in partnership with local
non-profits, training programs and
industry associations
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
Boston’s schools and academic institutions are
preparing students and mid-career professionals
for careers in the green building sector:
› Several Boston public schools have career and
technical education (CTE) programs that support
green buildings. Madison Park High School
serves approximately 10,000 students, with
certification programs for carpentry, electrical,
facilities management, plumbing and sheet metal.
The John D. O’Bryant School of Mathematics and
Science offers computer science and engineering
pathways. The Boston Green Academy has an
environmental science and technology program.
Boston Public Schools is also developing an afterschool carpentry program that will be open to
students across the district.
› Many higher education institutions in Boston
offer certificates and degrees that prepare their
students for careers in facilities management
or in the trades. These institutions include
Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology,
Bunker Hill Community College, Mass Maritime,
Northeastern University, Roxbury Community
College, and Wentworth Institute of Technology,
among many others.
50 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
The City of Boston is investing in workforce
development:
› The Neighborhood Jobs Trust collects fees from
developers of large commercial projects to fund
jobs, job training and other related services.
The Trust funds programs like the Tuition-Free
Community College Plan, Roxbury Community
College Center for Smart Building Technology,
and Youth Options Unlimited (YOU) Boston, a
workforce development organization that works
with young people who are court-involved or
gang-affiliated, re-entering the community from
incarceration, or seeking refuge from poverty or
violence.
The City and its partners operate training programs
for youth and incumbent professionals to access
training:
› The Tuition-Free Community College Plan
covers tuition and other expenses for eligible
Boston residents who have completed high
school. Participating colleges include Bunker
Hill Community College, Roxbury Community
College, MassBay Community College, and the
Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology.
Students can also transfer to tuition-free fouryear colleges through the Boston Bridge from the
state’s Commonwealth Commitment program.
› In 2018, the City hosted Building Operator
Certification (BOC) training to ensure municipal
operators can make City-owned buildings
perform at the highest level. Building off of
that success, A Better City and Local Initiatives
Support Corporation (LISC) Boston have hosted
additional training sessions in 2019. The City of
Boston will partner to carry out at least four more
rounds of training before the end of 2020.
› Trade unions also offer training programs to their
incumbent workers. Many City- and partner-led
programs recruit Boston residents to train and
place them in careers in the building industry.
› The Mayor’s Office of Workforce Development’s
City Academy is a training pipeline for Boston
residents to access entry-level City positions.
There are currently free training tracks for
Commercial Driver’s License (CDL) and Hoisting
and Emergency Medical Training. The CDL and
Hoisting training partners with the Public Works
Department, Parks and Recreation Department,
and Boston Water and Sewer Commission, as well
as Suffolk Construction, a private construction
industry partner.
Mayor Martin J. Walsh joins members of YouthBuild Boston, the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative and Madison Park
High School students, and lends a hand in installing siding onto one of the City of Boston's Neighborhood Home Initiative
homes being built at 31-33 Woodville Street in Dudley Square.
© Don Harney
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 51
› YouthBuild Boston is a job training organization
that works to prepare under-served community
members in the Boston area for jobs in the
building trades. As part of the Office of Workforce
Development’s Greater Boston American
Apprenticeship Initiative, WinnResidential
and Wentworth Institute of Technology have
partnered with YouthBuild Boston to offer
a paid Facilities Maintenance Technician
apprenticeship. Participants are paid a living
wage and receive a certificate upon completion.
› The Economic Mobility Lab tests ideas to
economically empower low- and moderateincome Bostonians. Its programs include
Building Boston’s Future, a Boston Center for
Youth and Families (BCYF) program to place high
school students in workplaces for paid 7-week
internships.
› Operation Exit is a re-entry program that
provides participants with the career readiness
and occupational skills training needed to
apply for state-registered Building Trades
apprenticeship programs.
› Building Pathways is a Boston-based non-profit
organization that operates the Building Trades
Pre-Apprenticeship Program, which prepares
under-represented, disadvantaged or low-skilled
Boston metro area residents to enter a union
apprenticeship program.
The programs listed above are just a few of the
many programs connecting Boston’s youth, people
of color, women, and other residents to careers
in construction and facilities management. The
Mayor’s Office of Workforce Development works
to connect residents and companies to appropriate
programs and opportunities.
WHAT IS THE BOSTON RESIDENT
JOBS POLICY?
The Boston Resident Jobs Policy (BRJP) is an
ordinance passed in 1983 and updated most recently
in 2017. Private development projects over 50,000
square feet and any public development project must
meet the following employment standards for the
total work hours of journey people and apprentices
in each trade:
› at least 51 percent must go to Boston residents;
› at least 40 percent must go to people of color; and
› at least 12 percent must go to women.
The BRJP office and the Boston Planning &
Development Agency (BPDA) monitor projects
for BRJP compliance. The Boston Employment
Commission also reviews projects and makes
recommendations to the BRJP office and the BPDA
to strengthen compliance.
52 2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings
While the City of Boston is taking steps to mitigate
emissions from large buildings, we also need higher
energy efficiency and renewable energy standards
across the entire building sector. Continued
advocacy by the City and its partners for statewide
building codes and utility incentive programs
that align with carbon neutrality will allow
municipalities across Massachusetts to construct
buildings that not only support our climate
goals, but also ensure that Bostonians and other
Baystaters can live and work in better buildings.
In parallel with updating zoning requirements,
the City of Boston is advocating for updating the
Massachusetts Stretch Energy Code to a Zero
Net Carbon (ZNC) standard. In Massachusetts,
the state-level Board of Building Regulations
and Standards (BBRS) sets energy performance
standards for building construction and renovation.
In 2009, the BBRS developed a Stretch Energy Code
for the first time, allowing municipalities to adopt
a higher performance standard than that of the
Base Energy Code. At the time, the Stretch Code
represented a roughly 20 percent improvement
in energy performance over the Base Code.
But as of March 2019, the Base Code has effectively
caught up to the Stretch Code. Updating the
Stretch Code to a ZNC standard is key to reaching
Boston’s carbon neutrality goals.
In order to carry out deep energy retrofits and
electrification at scale, building owners need access
to a more robust suite of incentives and financing
mechanisms. The City of Boston will work with
state and regional partners to advocate for changes
to Mass Save and other state programs that better
support whole building approaches and encourage
fuel-switching from fossil fuels to electric or other
carbon-free technologies. The Energy Efficiency
Advisory Council (EEAC) guides Mass Save,
the ratepayer-funded utility energy efficiency
incentive program. With utility incentive programs
structured to encourage deep decarbonization of
buildings, building owners will be better equipped
to develop capital plans that significantly improve
the carbon performance of their buildings over time.
The City of Boston will continue to advocate, as
part of the Mayor’s legislative agenda, for state
legislation and regulatory changes that align with
our goals for a carbon-neutral and climate-ready
Boston.
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› The BBRS approves a ZNC Stretch Code, or
comparable policies or programs, that allows
municipalities in Massachusetts to adopt ZNC
requirements for all new construction.
DESIGNING FOR EQUITY
› Creating consistent net-zero building standards
ensures that all housing is built to the same, higher
level of energy efficiency and comfort, reducing
the energy cost burden of owners or tenants.
7 ADVOCATE FOR STATE BUILDING
POLICIES THAT ALIGN WITH
CARBON NEUTRALITY BY 2050
2019 Boston CAP Update | Buildings 53
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Up to 300,000 tons of annual avoided
carbon emissions from business as usual
Lower energy bills for Boston homes,
businesses and institutions
Removing harmful air pollution and
improving indoor air quality
Creating green jobs and boosting real
estate values
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
› Mayor Martin J. Walsh sent a joint letter with
the City Manager of Cambridge and the Mayor of
Somerville to the BBRS requesting a discussion of
a ZNC Stretch Code at their June 2019 meeting.
The Board discussed the proposal and sent it to
the Energy Advisory Committee for review.
› The City of Boston is enrolled as a member of the
International Code Council. We will strengthen
our advocacy for changes to the International
Energy Conservation Code (IECC). The IECC
provides the basis for updates to the Base Energy
Code every three years, per the directive of the
2008 Green Communities Act
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS & PARTNERS
1. Provide public comment and support as part of
the BBRS process to study a ZNC update to the
Stretch Code
A. Share the City’s efforts with residents and
local organizations to increase awareness and
support for a ZNC Stretch Code
Ongoing City of Boston, neighboring
cities, regional partners, industry
associations, academic institutions,
energy utilities, energy-focused
community groups
2.Advocate for energy efficiency programming that
supports whole-building deep energy retrofits
at the Massachusetts Energy Efficiency Advisory
Council (EEAC)
• Provide comment on draft three-year plans,
and advocate to add measures on an ongoing
basis (e.g., air-to-water heat pumps)
• Support equity-based frameworks for incentive
structures
• Advocate to change the Green Communities Act
to allow ratepayer-funded incentive programs to
include societal benefits in the cost-effectiveness
assessment, or remove the requirement entirely
Ongoing City, regional partners, EEAC,
utilities
3.Advocate for state policy changes that support
residential energy efficiency including scorecards
and energy disclosure requirements at points of
turnover (e.g., time of sale, time of lease)
Ongoing City, regional partners, state
representatives, local and
statewide environment- and
energy-focused organizations
4.Participate in ECC to cast votes in favor of energy
efficiency proposals
Ongoing City
54 2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation
TRANSPORTATION
In a carbon-neutral Boston, many more people will travel to and around the city by using public transit,
biking, or walking, all of which release little to no carbon per trip compared with cars. Go Boston 2030,
Mayor Walsh’s long-term transportation vision, lays out 58 transportation projects and policies that
expand access to connected transportation options, improve traffic-related safety on Boston's streets,
and ensure reliability of service for the City's residents, commuters and visitors. The City’s targets
include cutting drive-alone trips by more than half, increasing public transit ridership by more than a
third, increasing biking rates fourfold, and doubling walking rates.
2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation 55
The Go Boston 2030 projects and policies will
reduce vehicle miles traveled and carbon emissions
from transportation. Transportation accounts for
nearly a third of Boston’s total carbon emissions,
most of that from private vehicles that run on
gasoline. As a regional hub, Boston draws hundreds
of thousands of commuters daily. Because of
this dynamic, three-quarters of transportation
emissions come from travel between Boston and its
suburbs. As we shift as many travelers as possible
out of personal vehicles, we also have to ensure
that any vehicles left on the road become zeroemissions vehicles (ZEVs), such as electric vehicles.
Replacing gas and diesel vehicles with electric
or other zero-emissions alternatives will reduce
Boston’s remaining transportation emissions, as
well as remove harmful air pollution. As prices
continue to decline, EVs will become increasingly
affordable. Most current car owners in Boston
are “garage orphans” - renters and street parkers
who do not control their parking space and cannot
install EV chargers at home. To expand access
to charging and ZEV technologies, the City will
develop a roadmap for public EV charging and
carshare, install EV charging stations in municipal
lots and at select curb locations, and develop
vehicle replacement strategies for municipal fleets.
This is in addition to the City's EV policy requires
charging infrastructure in many new developments.
To achieve the mode shift and carbon reduction
goals of Go Boston 2030, this Plan details five key
strategies to accelerate emissions reductions from
Boston’s transportation system.
8. Advocate for Boston’s priority transit projects
within regional plans
9. Improve and expand active transportation
infrastructure
10. Encourage mode shift through transportation
demand management
and sustainable parking policies
11. Accelerate citywide zero-emission vehicle
deployment
12. Accelerate municipal fleet transition
to zero- and low-emission vehicles
2030 Targets
Up by a third Up by almost
a half
Increases
fourfold
Declines
marginally
Down by half Slight increase in
Work from Home
PUBLIC TRANSIT
34%
WALK
14%
BIKE
2%
CARPOOL
6%
DRIVE ALONE
39%
Today
OTHER/WORK
FROM HOME
5%
Go Boston 2030 Mode Shift Targets
56 2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation
Malden
Chelsea
Revere
Medford
Everett
Arlington
Cambridge
Boston
Somerville
Service Layer Credits:
of total transportation emissions
came from passenger vehicles
of total transportation emissions from
travel to and from the Boston metro area
Electric Vehicle Zero Emission Vehicle
We need people who drive alone to take transit, carpool, bike or
walk to work instead
Any remaining vehicles must be
electric or zero-emission vehicles
Estimated total emmissions from
Boston’s transportation system in 2017
CO2
e
1.8MMT
65%
75%
2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation 57
The residents of Boston deserve high-quality,
subway-like service across our rail and transit
network. As part of the implementation strategy
for Go Boston 2030, our long-term transportation
plan, the City of Boston will continue to advocate
for and advance the urban rail and rapid bus
projects prioritized by the community. This
includes increasing service on the Fairmount
commuter rail line, advancing bus priority
infrastructure installation, and working with
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority
(MBTA) officials to create a vision and timeline
for a Red-Blue Line connector.
The City of Boston will also contribute to regional
planning efforts, such as the ongoing Rail Vision
process to improve the existing commuter rail
system led by the Massachusetts Department
of Transportation (MassDOT). The Boston
Transportation Department (BTD) now has a
dedicated team to advocate and design for public
transportation expansion and improvements in
underserved neighborhoods in the city. These new
resources will contribute to achieving the Go Boston
2030 goals of improving mobility and economic
outcomes for Bostonians, as well as residents of the
Greater Boston region, while encouraging mode
shift away from single occupancy vehicles toward
healthier, more sustainable modes.
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› 25 miles of new bus priority lanes by 2030
› Increase public transit commuter rates by a
third by 2030
EXPECTED BENEFITS
55,000 ton reduction in annual carbon
emissions from business as usual
Reduce vehicle-miles traveled (VMT)
by 7 percent
Improved air quality and quality of life
Improved mobility and economic
competitiveness in the Greater Boston
region
DESIGNING FOR EQUITY
› Participate in ongoing MBTA feasibility
assessment in support of low-income fares
› Hire organizers from within the community
to build support for new transit projects in
underserved neighborhoods
› Use social vulnerability metrics to guide the
formation of the City’s new Bus Priority Network
› Build on the successful model of the Roslindale
bus project, using partnerships with local
organizations and advocacy groups, including
student groups to build community support for
bus priority projects
› Coordinate with the Regional Housing
Partnership to increase affordable housing
supply along regional transit lines across the
Boston metro area
8 ADVOCATE FOR BOSTON’S PRIORITY
TRANSIT PROJECTS WITHIN REGIONAL
PLANS
58 2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS & PARTNERS
1. Advance a service enhancement proposal for the
Fairmount Line
2019 City, MBTA, Transit Matters,
Fairmount Indigo Transit Coalition
2.Create Boston’s first Bus Priority Network map
• Implement three or more bus priority projects
per year
Starting
2019
City, MBTA, local merchants,
community organizations, student
groups, and advocacy groups
3.Expand Inner Harbor ferry service from Lovejoy
Wharf, Fan Pier, Lewis Mall, and other new local
ferry routes
Ongoing City, MassDOT, MBTA, Massport,
transportation management
associations (TMAs), community
groups
4.Support upgrading the Silver Line to provide
better rapid bus service and terminal from
downtown to Dudley
2019 -
2020
City, MBTA
5.Support technology improvements to increase
Green Line speed and reliability, including safety
systems, signal priority technologies, station
improvements and stop consolidation
2019 -
2020
City, MBTA
6.Support flood protection and carbon reduction
measures for at-risk MBTA stations
Ongoing MBTA, City
7. Create new transit hubs or carry out
improvements at existing hubs in the Longwood
Medical Area, at West Station, and in Sullivan
Square
Ongoing City, TMAs, MBTA, BPDA
8.Increase sense of transit reliability through realtime information integration initiative, with 20
pilot locations across the Boston area
Starting
2020
MBTA, City
9.Advocate for measures that reduce the cost and
improve the quality of public transit in Boston
• Support changes to gas taxes, vehicle subsidies
and commuter tax incentives to deter driving
and support transit
• Support equitable transit investments in the
Boston metro area as part of the Transportation
and Climate Initiative
Ongoing City
DEDICATED RESOURCES
› Financial agreement with the MBTA in which
the MBTA funds the initial implementation of
bus priority infrastructure within Boston along
certain high priority corridors and the City funds
maintenance
› New transit-dedicated staff in the City's
Transportation Department
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
› Based on extensive public input, Go Boston 2030
identifies regional-scale transit projects to be
implemented near- and long-term that will improve
mobility in and out of the City and connectivity
across communities in the Boston area. The City is
implementing the better bike corridors and rapid
bus projects laid out in the plan.
2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation 59
› Mayor Walsh’s 2019 legislative package includes
An Act to Allow Regional Ballot Initiatives, An Act
to Allow Parking Assessments for Infrastructure
Investment, and An Act to Update Transportation
Network Company Assessments. The Act Relative
to Regional Transportation Ballot Initiatives
would enable a municipality to raise local money
through a ballot initiative to fund Boston’s priority
transportation projects. The Act to Update
Transportation Network Assessments would
increase the price of solo rides booked through
ride-hailing companies.
› The MBTA Rail Vision Study is identifying costeffective strategies to improve mobility and
economic competitiveness of the greater Boston
region by transforming the existing commuter
rail system.
› The CharlieCard Access Initiative seeks to make
transit use cheaper and more convenient for
riders. CharlieCards—previously only available
through one’s employer, via online order, or at
Downtown Crossing—are now free and available
at City Hall and at 15 branches of the Boston
Public Library.
› In addition to the rapid bus projects birthed
from Go Boston 2030, the City has identified
additional corridors where upgrades with bus
priority treatments would have sizable, positive
impacts on the city’s transit network. This network
and the Go Boston 2030 rapid bus projects have
been combined to form the Boston Bus Priority
Network.
› The Transportation and Climate Initiative
(TCI) is a regional collaboration of 13 Northeast
and Mid-Atlantic jurisdictions that seeks to
develop the clean energy economy, improve
transportation, and reduce carbon emissions
in the transportation sector. TCI is currently
exploring a regional cap-and-trade policy to
reduce carbon emissions from the transportation
sector.
COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION
› The City's Transit Team will share project-specific
information and engagement opportunities on
its website.
› The City will host "learn-a-thon" events
across Boston’s neighborhoods to disseminate
information about the many tools that comprise
bus priority.
› The City's Transit Team will participate in
community events on an ongoing basis, as well
those hosted by partner organizations such as the
MBTA, MassDOT, BPDA, and community groups.
Travel lanes that prioritize buses, like the bus lanes on
Washington Street in Roslindale, help ensure faster and
more reliable service for riders.
Charlies Cards are available at City Hall, select MBTA
stations, and 15 Boston Public Library locations.
© Katherine Eshel
60 2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation
An essential element of a carbon-neutral
transportation strategy is the shift away from
single-occupancy automobile trips. Public transit,
walking, and biking release far smaller quantities
of carbon than automobiles. A transportation
system that emphasizes walking and bicycling
burns less fuel, reduces air pollution, and makes
streets less crowded, less stressful, and much safer.
The City is implementing street design projects
that prioritize walking and help create a connected,
safe network of bike facilities, with the goal of
increasing biking rates fourfold. The City is also
prioritizing sidewalk repair and traffic-calming
projects in areas most in need.
Land use and development patterns have a major
impact on residents’ ability to walk or bike for their
everyday needs. The City will continue to integrate
and expand active transportation infrastructure
into neighborhood planning efforts and individual
development projects, to advocate for improved
walking and bicycling and to discourage new
automobile trips.
NEXT 5 YEARS
The City will take the following steps to continue
to improve and expand active transportation
infrastructure:
› Create a program to hire Boston non-profits and
residents to implement outreach processes for
walking and bicycling projects and to co-create
neighborhood priorities for walking and bicycling
improvements;
› Deepen partnerships between City agencies, such
as the Boston Public Health Department and the
Department of Neighborhood Development, to
ensure equitable outcomes from transportation
investments;
› Develop relevant materials in commonly-used
languages to be shared at community events, by
direct mail and online, to ensure that all residents
are informed about projects and are able to
participate;
› Continue to expand incentives and accessibility
initiatives around bike riding, particularly for
young people, including bike-riding classes for
youth and additional infrastructure near schools.
9 IMPROVE AND EXPAND ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE
2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation 61
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Reduced carbon emissions from
avoided automobile trips
Public health benefits
Increased connectivity to jobs
and educational opportunities
Safer residential streets that encourage
community gathering and play
DESIGNED FOR EQUITY
› The Neighborhood Slow Streets program ensures
that traffic-calming requests are prioritized for
the areas with the greatest need: where we have
more children, older adults, and people with
disabilities; where more crashes are happening
per mile; and near public places and spaces
including parks, schools, and libraries.
› The publicly-owned bike share program is
designed to complement bus and rail transit,
providing a low-cost option for first- and lastmile trips. A discounted fare is available to
households who qualify for a variety of public
assistance programs or who have incomes below
40 percent Area Median Income (AMI).
› The Public Works Department and Mayor’s Office
of New Urban Mechanics have partnered to
develop the StreetCaster program, and create
new networks of sidewalks in areas that need
them most, while simultaneously improving the
way that resident requests for repairs through
the City’s 311 system are addressed.
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› A fourfold increase in biking rates by 2030
› 50 percent increase in walking rates by 2030
› 100 percent of homes located within a 10-minute
walk of a bike share station
› 3-5 neighborhoods receive traffic-calming
measures annually through the Neighborhood
Slow Streets program
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
› The City’s Neighborhood Slow Streets
program partners with communities to develop
appropriate and responsive traffic-calming plans
for small, residential streets that suffer from high
crash rates and are home to youth, elders, and
those with disabilities.
› Bluebikes is the City’s public bike share program.
The regional network offers 3,500 bikes at more
than 325 stations throughout Boston, Brookline,
Cambridge, Everett, and Somerville. In 2018, the
City of Boston added 51 new stations. As a result,
85 percent of Boston households are now within
a 5-7 minute walk of a Bluebikes station, up from
67 percent in 2017. Mayor Walsh’s FY20 capital
budget and financial support from Blue Cross
and Blue Shield of Massachusetts mean
another 50 stations will be installed in 2019.
The expansion has included 25 stations in new
neighborhoods and additional capacity in the
existing service area.
› The City’s Women Bike program offers free learnto-ride classes led by women for Boston residents
who identify as female or gender-nonconforming.
Classes are offered monthly between May and
October each year.
› The City’s Youth Cycling Program helps
students from grades 2 to 12 learn bicycle safety.
The Boston Bikes team brings bikes, helmets,
instructors, and an active 2-week curriculum.
Boston Public Schools can apply for the program
in the fall and spring of each year. More than
38,000 young Bostonians have participated in the
program since 2009.
62 2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation
The City of Boston will adopt transportation
demand management (TDM) and parking
programs and policies that support the mode shift
goals of Go Boston 2030 and our carbon neutrality
goals. Policies will incentivize the use of shared
vehicles and public transit over single-occupancy
vehicles, reducing congestion, air pollution, and
carbon emissions in Boston’s busiest neighborhoods
and promoting healthier communities and lifestyles.
In fulfillment of its Go Boston 2030 commitment,
the City is updating its TDM policies. The initiative
is working with developers, employers, and state
and City agencies to forge policy and programming
that promote dramatic mode shift away from
driving alone, reduce emissions, and improve
multimodal connectivity. The updated TDM
policies will include a points-based system that
will allow developers to choose from a menu of
TDM options as part of their Transportation Access
Plan Agreement (TAPA), a zoning requirement for
large projects in Boston. These TDM options aim to
reduce the vehicle miles traveled generated by new
projects. The TAPA process will also be brought
online to make the agreements more publicly
accessible and to further promote solutions like
carshare fleets, bikeshare, transit access passes,
teleworking, unbundled parking, daily rather than
monthly parking passes, parking cash out programs
and other transit benefits.
The City will also update and expand parking
programs and policies, in particular the parking
freezes, to further reduce drive-alone rates. The
parking freezes implement the federal Clean Air
Act and are intended to reduce air pollution by
restricting the availability of parking and thereby
discouraging driving, especially by commuters.
This is accomplished by establishing a cap on the
number of certain types of off-street parking that
is allowed.
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Up to a 62,000 ton reduction in annual
carbon emissions from business as usual
Reduce VMT by approximately 7 percent,
particularly in new development
Improved air quality, safety and
wellbeing in new developments
Commuter mode shift from drive alone
to shared and active transportation
modes
Increased access to bikeshare, carshare,
transit and EV charging
DESIGNING FOR EQUITY
› Weight TDM measures by neighborhood need
› Focus guidelines for traffic impact analysis for
new developments on pedestrians, cyclists and
bus riders to prioritize moving people over
moving vehicles
10 ENCOURAGE MODE SHIFT THROUGH
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND
MANAGEMENT AND SUSTAINABLE
PARKING POLICIES
2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation 63
› Support equitable mode shift and air pollution
reduction measures that prioritize benefits to
EJ communities
› Develop a program to allow implementation of
community-based parking alternatives for use
of the public right-of-way
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS & PARTNERS
1. Complete inventory of the Downtown Parking
Freeze and develop priorities and timeline for
other parking and curb use inventories
2019 City, BPDA
2.Release citywide TDM framework and new
TAPA guidelines
• Introduce points-based system
• Redefine parking maximum ratios
2020 City, BPDA, transportation
management associations (TMAs),
developers, regional planning
organizations
3.Update Downtown, South Boston and
East Boston parking freeze regulations
2020 City, BPDA
4.Launch an online platform to streamline the
TAPA process, including a points-based system
for developers to select TDM measures
2021 City
5.Carry out parking inventories of priority areas and
identify neighborhoods for tactical interventions
(e.g., pick-up and drop-off areas, performancebased parking extension…)
• Pilot flexible curbs with shifting functions
based on time of day and demand (e.g., Bus
Rapid Transit, passenger vehicles, bike and
scooter parking)
• Expand pick-up and drop-off areas to additional
neighborhoods
• Continue to expand performance-based parking
2020 City, MassDOT, Massport, TMAs,
private developers, advocacy groups
6.Study transportation impact fee (a one-time fee
paid by developers) that would be used to improve
transportation networks outside of development
projects
2022 City
7. Evaluate the impact of expanding the parking
freeze to additional neighborhoods
2021-2024 City, BPDA
8.Assess additional programs and policies to deter
single occupancy vehicles, including residential
parking permits, parking cash-out and other
commuter incentives
Ongoing City
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› Cut the drive alone rate in half by 2030
› Increase public transit commuter rates by a third
by 2030
DEDICATED RESOURCES
› As part of the implementation of Go Boston 2030,
the Boston Transportation Department has hired
a full-time staff member to oversee its TDM
program.
64 2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
› The current process to integrate transportation
demand management strategies occurs largely
through the Transportation Access Plan
Agreement (TAPA) as part of the large project
review process for large developments over
50,000 square feet.
› The Downtown and South Boston parking
freezes set caps on the number of off-street
parking spaces to reduce air pollution. New
developments seeking to build off-street parking
must apply for parking freeze permits through
the Air Pollution Control Commission.
› The City set parking maximum parking
requirements for new development in Access
Boston 2000-2010, Boston’s transportation plan
before Go Boston 2030. These requirements
decrease the closer development is located to
transit hubs.
› Performance-based parking in Back Bay and
the Seaport set dynamic metering rates (e.g.,
charging more for parking at peak times) that
reduced idling and cruising.
› Mayor Walsh’s 2019 legislative package includes
An Act to Allow Regional Ballot Initiatives, An Act
to Allow Parking Assessments for Infrastructure
Investment, and An Act to Update Transportation
Network Company Assessments, including by
increasing the price of solo rides.
COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION
› Bring TAPAs online.
› Work with employers and TMAs to host
workshops and events that promote biking,
walking and carpooling.
› Distribute multilingual information for landlords
and tenants citywide on TDM programs.
› Public campaigns to demonstrate both benefits of
limited parking and concerns associated with free
private vehicle parking (e.g., use of public space
for private purposes, percent of road use time
allocated to private vehicles versus public).
› Coordination with TMAs to generate awareness
and excitement for tactical, localized pilot
infrastructure.
The City uses smart parking meters to calibrate parking prices according to the time of day and driver demand. This
performance-based parking system has managed parking demand, improved safety, and decreased congestion.
© Katherine Eshel
2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation 65
The City of Boston will develop a ZEV Roadmap,
which will lay out strategies to increase access
to electric vehicle charging infrastructure and
transition shared mobility and fleets to electric
vehicles or other ZEVs. These strategies will
address the lack of infrastructure and education
around electric vehicles (EVs) and other ZEV
technologies over the next five years, as well as
issues around equity and accessibility.
To reach carbon neutrality, Boston must transition
all remaining vehicles on the roads to electric or
other zero-emission vehicles over the next 30 years,
inaddition to maximizing mode shift from single
occupancy vehicles to shared and active modes.
A ZEV is a vehicle that emits no tailpipe emissions
from the onboard source of power, such as battery
electric vehicles and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.
ZEVs generate fewer emissions than gas- and
diesel-powered vehicles and do not produce
tailpipe pollution. ZEV sales have grown rapidly in
Massachusetts, nearly doubling between 2017 and
2018 alone.
DESIGNING FOR EQUITY
› Prioritize deployment of EV charging
infrastructure in municipal lots and other
publicly-owned locations in environmental
justice communities
› Explore mechanisms to offer EV carshare and
reduced price or free electric vehicle charging at
City-owned stations for residents participating in
a qualifying benefit program (e.g., Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
beneficiaries
› Evaluate and, when appropriate, promote
financial mechanisms to make transitioning to
ZEVs affordable, particularly for low-income
residents, including lease-purchase models,
zero-interest loans and vehicle trade-in programs
› Create economic opportunity for low-income
residents by partnering with transportation
network companies and mobility on demand
providers to electrify their fleets and provide
low-cost leases on ZEVs for drivers
› Carry out targeted education initiatives in
low uptake neighborhoods to increase driver
exposure and encourage drivers to choose EVs
over internal combustion engines
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› Public charging infrastructure available in every
Boston neighborhood by 2023
› 100 percent of residents within a 10-minute walk
of a public EV charger or EV carshare facility
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Up to a 400,000 ton reduction in annual
carbon emissions from business as usual
Air pollution reductions of 3,400 kg
PM2.5, 39,000 kg NOx from business as
usual
$300 savings in maintenance costs per
vehicle per year
Local employment from electric vehicle
supply equipment installation
11 SUPPORT CITYWIDE ZERO-EMISSION
VEHICLE (ZEV) DEPLOYMENT
66 2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS & PARTNERS
1. Convene an internal City working group to help
develop and implement a citywide ZEV strategy,
and to support transitioning municipal fleets to
ZEVs
Starting
in 2019,
ongoing
City
2.Develop a ZEV Roadmap to accelerate Boston’s
transition to EVs and other ZEV
• Set targets for deployment,
• Install chargers in City-owned lots and public
right of way,
• Develop how-to guides, and
• Employ strategies to increase public and private
fleet adoption
Starting
2020
City
3.Pilot electric vehicle car share as an expansion of
DriveBoston and in partnership with community
organizations
• Prioritize locations near transportation hubs and
environmental justice communities
• Explore sustainable business models for
community-owned or -managed EV carshare
Starting
2020
City, carshare providers,
community groups, community
development corporations (CDCs),
technical and design consultants
4.Install electric vehicle charging on 6 municipallyowned parking lots through the Eversource Make
Ready program
• Develop principles and timeline for roll-out in
additional lots
By 2020 City, Eversource, technical
consultants
5.Release how-to guides for installing EV chargers
targeted at landlords, employers and residents
By 2020 City, technical consultants
6.Incorporate ZEV strategies into Boston’s travel
demand management (TDM) programs, including:
• Integrate EV requirements into the Transportation
Access Plan Agreement (TAPA) process
• Collaborate with Transportation Management
Associations (TMAs) and TAPA holders to expand
charging in existing developments, and adopt
other EV strategies like reduced price charging
for ZEV workplace or rideshare vehicles
2020 City, BPDA, private developers,
regional partners, TMAs
7. Work with dealerships and other partners to
highlight availability of ZEVs through ride and drive
events and educational campaigns
Ongoing City, Eversource, auto dealers,
MassDEP, regional partners,
RMV, Auto Original Equipment
Manufacturers (OEMs)
2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation 67
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS & PARTNERS
8.Encourage uptake of electric vehicles in private
fleets and third-party carshare systems, including
through the updated TAPA process
Ongoing City, BHA, CDCs and other
community partners, carshare
service providers, TMAs, large
employers
9.Consider additional transportation options through
the permitting of shared micromobility such as
e-scooters and e-bikes
Starting
2020
City
10.Study equipment replacement strategies for older
or highly-polluting vehicles, including developing a
used EV market
Ongoing City
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
› The City of Boston has an electric vehicle policy,
which currently requires that 25 percent of offstreet parking in development undergoing Article
80 review be serviced by EV charging and the
remaining 75 percent be EV.
› DriveBoston is the City’s program to provide
public parking spaces in municipal lots and on
City streets for carshare vehicles, increasing
accessibility and public awareness of car sharing
as an alternative to private vehicle ownership.
› The Small Vehicle Sharing Business Advisory
Committee is an internal City working group
considering policies associated with permitting
small vehicle sharing-businesses, including the
potential of a shared e-scooter pilot program.
› Mayor Walsh’s 2019 legislative agenda includes
an Act Relative to Transportation Network
Company Rider Assessments. The bill would
provide a financial incentive for zero-emission
vehicles, such as electric vehicles, with a reduced
per-mile fee or an exemption in some cases.
› The Eversource Make Ready program is helping
increase access to electric vehicles by supporting
100 percent of the infrastructure costs for new
charging stations.
› The Massachusetts Offers Rebates for Electric
Vehicles (MOR-EV) program has issued rebates
of up to $1,500 for the purchase or lease of battery
EVs and fuel-cell electric vehicles and up to $450
for zero-emission motorcycles.
› As of 2019, individuals can receive up to $7,500
in federal tax credits for buying an EV.
› The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection manages the Massachusetts Electric
Vehicle Incentive Program (MassEVIP), as well
as Volkswagen Settlement funds. MassEVIP offers
incentives for workplace, multi-unit dwelling and
public access charging, and for fleet operators to
acquire EVs and charging stations.
COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION
› The City of Boston will maintain online resources
for current and prospective electric vehicle
drivers in the Boston area. This includes howto guides for property owners, residents, and
employers, for EV infrastructure installation, as
well as information about financial incentives and
charging networks. The City will also partner with
Eversource, auto dealerships, and other partners,
to host ride and drives and engagement initiatives.
68 2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation
Fuel used to power the City of Boston’s vehicle fleet
accounts for 0.5 percent of Boston’s total emissions,
and 25 percent of the local government emissions.
The City will work to accelerate the deployment
of zero- and low-emissions vehicles in municipal
fleets. Zero-emission vehicles (ZEVs)—such as
some plug-in hybrid vehicles, battery electric
vehicles, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles—generate
fewer emissions than gas- and diesel-powered
vehicles and don’t produce tailpipe pollution. The
2007 Executive Order on Climate Action ordered
that City departments purchase alternative fuel,
flexible fuel or hybrid vehicles, or the most fuelefficient vehicles within their class. Although costs
have gone down, the City remains constrained by
the high price of some electric and hybrid vehicles.
Currently, 30 percent of municipal vehicles in the
Central Fleet are electric vehicles or hybrids.
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Eliminate up to 25 percent of carbon
emissions from municipal operations
Improved air quality and reduced noise
$300 savings in maintenance per vehicle
per year
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› All vehicles purchased for Central Fleet are
electric or zero-emissions vehicles, or best in
class if an appropriate ZEV is not available
› 100 percent of passenger vehicles are
emissions free by 2035
› 100 percent of medium-duty vehicles are
emissions free by 2050
› 100 percent of heavy-duty vehicles are
emissions free or low emissions by 2060
12 ACCELERATE MUNICIPAL FLEET
TRANSITION TO ZERO- AND LOWEMISSION VEHICLES
The City has been adding electric vehicles to Fleet Hub,
the vehicle-sharing program for municipal employees.
© Katherine Eshel
2019 Boston CAP Update | Transportation 69
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS AND PARTNERS
1. Convene a quarterly internal City Working Group
to coordinate municipal fleet management and
citywide ZEV strategy
Starting in
2019
City
2.Develop a vehicle replacement plan to convert the
Central Fleet to 100 percent zero- and low-emission
vehicles
• Analyze telematics data from five Central Fleet
vehicles to determine optimal EV replacements
and charging sites as an initial test
• Evaluate carrying out a full fleet assessment using
telematics data
2020 City, data experts
3.Develop a plan and timeline to deploy electric
vehicle charging infrastructure across municipal
facilities and lots
2020 City, Eversource
4.Pilot electric, renewable diesel, and other carbonneutral technologies for heavy fleet vehicle
replacement
Starting
2021
City
5.Develop vehicle replacement plans for non-Central
Fleet vehicles
2020-2023 City
17 U.S. Department of Energy, “Case Study - Propane School Bus Fleets,” August 2014.
EXISTING TOOLS AND EFFORTS
› Four out of five vehicles in the City of Boston’s
Central Fleet are equipped with telematics
systems that provide information on vehicle and
fuel usage, including idling.
› Boston Public Schools is transitioning its bus fleet
from diesel to propane. Propane buses are more
efficient and can save nearly 50 percent per mile
in fuel and maintenance costs relative to diesel.
They are also cleaner, particularly when replacing
older diesel buses, emitting fewer air pollutants
and up to 15 percent fewer greenhouse gases.17
› The City of Boston is receiving support on zeroemissions vehicle deployment as part of the
Bloomberg American Cities Climate Challenge.
This includes developing guidance for installing
charging infrastructure in municipal parking lots,
how-to guides, and EV incentive programs for
residents, employers and auto-dealerships.
COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION
› To support electric vehicle uptake and appropriate
use, City staff will have access to training for
electric vehicle operation and maintenance. The
City will also offer test rides for City employees to
familiarize themselves with electric vehicles.
70 2019 Boston CAP Update | Energy Supply
ENERGY SUPPLY
Boston buildings, transportation and waste management systems must be powered by clean, renewable
energy to achieve our carbon neutral goal. This means switching away from fossil fuels to clean and
renewable electricity or other carbon-neutral energy sources. The sooner we make the shift, the sooner
we will reduce carbon emissions from our buildings and transportation, and decrease Boston’s cumulative
contribution to global climate change.
Currently, Massachusetts has a statewide Clean
Energy Standard that requires 80 percent clean
energy sources by 2050 for the electricity sector.
This means that Boston will need to go further than
the State’s efforts in order to achieve 100 percent
clean energy. Strategies to decarbonize Boston’s
energy supply include:
› Procuring renewable electricity for residents
and businesses in Boston through municipal
aggregation (Community Choice Energy);
› Buying renewable energy generated by local solar,
wind, and non-petroleum fuel sources
(e.g., biofuel);
› Buying Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs); and
› Buying renewable energy from resources outside
New England.
Over the next five years, the City of Boston will
implement three primary strategies to transition to
a carbon-free and resilient energy supply:
13. Implement and expand Community Choice Energy
14. Plan for the deployment of carbon-neutral
district energy microgrid systems
15. Support state policies and programs that
further decarbonize the region’s and Boston’s
energy supply
© Paulo Valdivieso
2019 Boston CAP Update | Energy Supply 71
Community Choice Energy (CCE), also known as
municipal aggregation, is a way for cities and
towns to purchase electricity on behalf of their
residents. The CCE program will allow the City
to harness the buying power of its residents and
businesses to purchase electricity for Bostonians
in bulk. The CCE program can increase the
stability of electricity prices and deliver higher
percentages of electricity produced by renewable
resources. Eversource, the City’s electric utility,
will continue to manage the distribution of
electricity to residents and businesses, but the
City will choose the companies that supply the
electricity to CCE customers. For every kilowatthour of electricity used by CCE customers, the City
will retain a fraction of a penny to cover the cost
of the program’s development and administration.
Boston’s CCE program will allow the City to
purchase more renewable energy than the state
requires utility companies to buy, and will give
residents a trusted option to power their homes
and businesses.
METRICS FOR SUCCESS
› New sources of renewable electricity added to
the grid
› Number of residents who become and remain
CCE customers
› Number of residents who opt to purchase
100 percent renewable electricity
› Number of low- and fixed-income residents
whose energy bill becomes more predictable and
affordable as a result of their participation in the
program
EXPECTED BENEFITS
Reduced carbon emissions from
electricity consumption by residents
and businesses
Electricity that has a higher percentage
of renewable electricity than is required
by state law
Electricity prices that are more stable
and vary less season by season
Protection from the predatory practices
of some retail electricity suppliers
DESIGNED FOR EQUITY
› Buy power based on principles and vision
developed by the CCE community working group
› Make participation in the CCE program optional
for all residents at all times
› Increase supply of renewable energy to lowincome residents, potentially by using the
aggregation to invest directly in new, local
renewable projects; Include a reduced cost,
alternative for CCE customers with low or fixed
incomes that provides them with electricity
that meets the state-required percentage of
renewable electricity
› Educate residents about the predatory practices
of some retail electricity suppliers, who often
prey on the City’s elderly and low-income
populations by offering low introductory rates
that include hidden fees and price increases
13 IMPLEMENT AND EXPAND
COMMUNITY CHOICE ENERGY
72 2019 Boston CAP Update | Energy Supply
PROGRAM VALUES
A community-based working group set the following
principles and values to govern the CCE program:
› Reduce carbon emissions;
› Increase the amount of renewable energy
generation on the grid;
› Support local renewable energy;
› Ensure affordability and price stability;
› Strengthen consumer protection; and
› Commitment to environmental justice.
COMMUNICATION AND EDUCATION
› The plan that the City submitted to the
Department of Public Utilities for our
CCE program includes a comprehensive
communication campaign that relies on printed
materials, online resources, community meetings,
a customer service center, translation services,and
other communication tools. The campaign has
been designed to reach all of Boston’s residents
and small businesses by taking demographics,
language diversity, and other factors into account.
STEPS TIMELINE IMPLEMENTERS & PARTNERS
1. Launch CCE program, pending approval of
Boston’s plan by the Department of Public Utilities
2020
(pending
DPU
approval)
City, Colonial Power Group,
Community Paradigm Associates
2.Implement an opt-up engagement program in
partnership with community organizations
Starting
2020
City, community-based
organizations and environmental
groups
3.Evaluate development of a municipal ratepayerfunded energy efficiency incentive program
Starting
2020
City, local funders, technical
consultants
4.Develop a plan to carry out direct investment in
renewables through CCE
2020-2022 City, Colonial Power Group,
Community Paradigm Associates,
community advisory group
5.Use data collected through the CCE program to
find opportunities to support energy efficiency
programs
Starting
2021
City, utility partners, Mass Save
The City is working with Colonial Power Group and Community Paradigm Associates to design and implement
CCE in Boston. Colonial Power Group has helped more than 60 Massachusetts cities and towns launch and
manage CCE programs. Community Paradigm Associates specializes in municipal law and process. They will
also help us with collaborative decision-making and community engagement. The City launched a community
working group made up of residents, experts, advocates, and community leaders in December 2018 to inform
the design and implementation of the CCE program. As of September 2019, the CCE program is pending review
and approval by the Department of Public Utilities.
2019 Boston CAP Update | Energy Supply 73
Adopted by the Boston Planning & Development
Agency (BPDA) in 2018, the Smart Utilities Policy
for Article 80 Large Project Development Review
aims to integrate the resilience and efficiency
benefits of district energy and microgrids into
the planning and design process for large new
developments.
The Smart Utilities Policy calls for the incorporation
of five Smart Utility Technologies (SUTs) into new
Article 80 developments based on different size
thresholds and criteria. Two SUTs apply only to
projects over 1.5 million square feet:
› District energy microgrid; and
› Telecom utilidor (an accessible underground
duct bank that consolidates assets for telecom
services, reducing the need for street openings to
install telecom services)
District energy systems can produce steam, hot
water and chilled water (“thermal services”) at a
central plant and provide these thermal services to
multiple buildings, usually via underground pipes.
District energy systems can produce these thermal
services from both renewable energy sources
and fossil fuels. Depending on the energy sources
used, these systems can also provide electricity
(“electrical services”). A system that provides both
thermal and electrical services can be referred to as
a district energy microgrid.
18 Boston University Institute of Sustainable Energy, “Carbon Free Boston: Summary Report,” January 2019, pp. 88-91.
Due to better energy efficiency and economies
of scale, district energy provides opportunities
to reduce energy use, energy cost, and carbon
emissions when compared to individual building
systems. District energy may also improve
community resilience by providing energy services
even when the regional grid cannot deliver
electricity due to an emergency.
Current district energy microgrid systems in
Boston provide secure heating and electricity to
approximately 10 percent of total floorspace in
the city; however, many of these systems rely on
natural gas.18 While compared to the electric grid
of today these district energy systems result in
higher efficiency and fewer carbon emissions, as
the regional electric grid gets cleaner, the emission
reduction benefits of fossil fuel-based district
energy microgrids will no longer be outweighed.
While district energy systems that use natural
gas can reduce emissions until 2032, by 2050 the
Carbon Free Boston analysis found that equipping
large new buildings with natural gas cogenerationbased district energy systems may add 4,000 tons
of carbon per year.
14 PLAN FOR THE DEPLOYMENT
OF CARBON-NEUTRAL DISTRICT
ENERGY MICROGRID SYSTEMS
74 2019 Boston CAP Update | Energy Supply
While many existing systems rely on natural gas,
some new projects are deploying district energy
microgrid systems that are compatible with a
carbon-neutral energy future:
› As a result of the Smart Utilities Policy, some
developers are adopting district energy
microgrid-ready design when their energy
models indicate that a natural gas-based district
energy microgrid has no clean emissions
reduction benefit over the current grid. A district
energy microgrid-ready design allows developers
and property owners to integrate carbon-neutral
and resilient energy options as they emerge.
› The new Harvard District Energy Facility (DEF)
in Allston uses an efficient low temperature hot
water distribution system that can be converted
to emerging carbon-neutral technologies in
the future. The facility also includes the largest
thermal storage tank in Massachusetts, which can
supply the campus with chilled water during the
daytime to lower the burden on the power grid
during peak times, potentially reducing carbon
emissions and saving money. Harvard University
has set goals to be fossil fuel-neutral by 2026 and
fossil fuel-free by 2050.
› HEET, a local non-profit, commissioned
BuroHappold Engineering to assess the feasibility
of replacing leakprone gas infrastructure with
interconnected street-segment geothermal to
deliver renewable thermal to all. HEET expects to
develop pilot projects with local gas companies
over the next few years.
In the next five years, the City of Boston and the
BPDA will take the following actions:
› Continue to align the Smart Utilities Policy with
carbon neutrality goals by emphasizing carbonneutral district energy systems using renewable
and all-electric sources; and
› Develop a strategy to prioritize where, if at all,
natural gas-based systems would still be needed
in the future, including hospitals.
Energy-efficient & Renewable or highly-efficient net-zero buildings on-site electric and/or
thermal generation*
District energy
microgrid
*Includes:
› Thermal energy storage systems to reduce
peak energy demand;
› Ground source heat pumps and geothermal
district energy
› Co-generation systems for life-preserving
facilities such as hospitals and emergency
shelters.
2019 Boston CAP Update | Energy Supply 75
The City of Boston can take steps to decarbonize
the energy supply for local government operations,
but in order to become carbon-neutral, every
sector needs access to clean, renewable energy and
smart energy systems. The City will build on its
record of leadership on energy through the Mayor’s
legislative agenda and public advocacy on key
issues at the state level.
SUPPORT FOR A 100 PERCENT CLEAN GRID
The Massachusetts Clean Energy Standard (CES)
set a target of 80 percent of electricity sales
that energy suppliers must procure from clean
sources by 2050. However, a 100 percent clean,
renewable energy supply is a baseline condition
for reaching carbon neutrality. As a member of
the Implementation Advisory Committee for the
Global Warming Solutions Act, the City of Boston
will support inclusion of scenarios that examine a
100 percent clean grid in the state’s 80x50 study
and plans. The City will also continue to support
policies and incentive programs for expanded
energy storage, solar and wind generation, and
other distributed energy resources.
FUEL-SWITCHING IN ENERGY EFFICIENCY
INCENTIVE PROGRAMS
The Massachusetts Energy Efficiency Advisory
Council (EEAC) oversees utility-operated energy
efficiency programs. These programs, under the
umbrella brand of Mass Save, operate in accordance
with three-year plans developed with the EEAC and
approved by the Department of Public Utilities. The
2019-2021 three-year plan is the first that does not
prohibit the use of energy efficiency incentives to
switch heating system fuels. The City of Boston will
work with the Metropolitan Area Planning Council
and other partners on the EEAC to ensure that
Mass Save incentives are structured to encourage
systematic fuel-switching away from fuel oil and
natural gas to electricity or other clean energy
sources.
NATURAL GAS INFRASTRUCTURE AND
DEMAND RESPONSE
Natural gas use and leaks from natural gas pipes
accounted for 29 percent of Boston’s communitywide emissions in 2017. As part of his 2019
legislative agenda, Mayor Walsh has introduced an
Act to Modernize Our Natural Gas Infrastructure/
Reduce Gas Leaks. This legislation would give the
Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities the
authority to fine natural gas distribution companies
for the total volume of all gas leaks. This policy
change would incentivize the utility companies
to update their infrastructure, provide revenue to
reduce communities’ exposure to gas leaks, and
fund projects to replace trees and other resources
harmed by gas leaks.
In order to encourage efficiency in natural gas
use, the City will support the development of a
framework to encourage demand response among
commercial natural gas users, for instance by
drawing from on-site energy storage systems. In
the electricity sector, ISO New England, the agency
that operates our regional electric transmission
grid, compensates large electricity users for
reducing consumption when demand or market
prices are high. By encouraging customers to
SUPPORT STATE POLICIES AND
PROGRAMS THAT FURTHER
DECARBONIZE THE REGION'S AND
BOSTON’S ENERGY SUPPLY
15
76 2019 Boston CAP Update | Energy Supply
reduce consumption, ISO-NE avoids putting the
grid under too much stress. The natural gas sector
can similarly optimize investments in grid capacity
by using demand response. National Grid has
piloted a demand response program for commercial
customers in New York; a similar framework could
be tested in the Boston area.
CONNECTING RESILIENCE AND ENERGY
EFFICIENCY
The state is currently developing the Clean Peak
Energy Standard, which will provide incentives to
clean energy providers that can supply electricity
or reduce demand during seasonal peak demand
periods. Currently, when electricity demand
peaks, energy suppliers have to power up fossil
fuel generators to meet the need and prevent
grid outages. The Clean Peak Energy Standard
will encourage suppliers to meet peak electricity
demand with cleaner power and reduce the need
for back-up fossil fuel generators.
One of the features under consideration is a
general resilience multiplier that would reward
facilities that can continue to provide power during
grid outages. The Clean Peak Standard should
also consider an added social equity multiplier
that rewards facilities that serve low-income
communities during grid outages.
Chris Cook, Chief of Environment, Energy, and Open Space, inspects the geothermal test well site for the Boston
University Center for Computing & Data Sciences.
Street trees provide shade and cooling, but methane leaks
from natural gas pipes can suffocate them by depriving
their roots of oxygen. Mayor Walsh introduced legislation
in 2019 to give cities more resources to replace trees and
generally reduce communities' exposure to gas leaks.
© Aaron Ye for Boston University Photography
© Katherine Eshel
2019 Boston CAP Update | A Carbon-Free Community 77
A CARBON-FREE
COMMUNITY
While the strategies laid out in this Update will achieve significant progress toward carbon neutrality as
we currently measure our emissions, in the long run we will need to take a larger view of what it means to
become a carbon-neutral Boston. Beyond the energy that powers our buildings and transportation, our
economic decisions as consumers, businesses and institutions can also result in significant carbon
emissions and support industries that contribute to global climate change.
© Katherine Eshel
78 2019 Boston CAP Update | A Carbon-Free Community
The Zero Waste Boston plan lays out strategies to
divert 90 percent of Boston’s waste, and includes a
strong focus on source reduction, which can reduce
waste emissions by 40 percent in 2050.
The Carbon Free Boston analysis found that
the incineration of Boston’s waste in waste-toenergy facilities, as well as waste collection and
composting, generated about 393,000 tons of CO2
e
in 2017. Zero Waste Boston strategies may reduce
direct emissions from waste by 60 percent.
In addition to the emissions generated by waste
disposal, consumption by the Boston community
gives rise to the generation of carbon emissions
outside city borders to produce goods and services
for Boston residents. According to the C40 Cities
report Consumption-based GHG emissions of C40
cities, upstream emissions may represent more
than double the emissions from local energy use in
buildings, transportation and waste management.19
19 C40 Cities, “Consumption-based GHG emissions of C40 cities,” March 2018.
In the next five years, the City will take steps to
reduce consumption-based emissions:
› Conduct a consumption-based emissions
inventory;
› Promote sustainable consumption and help the
public shift to goods and services with lower
emissions;
› Explore embodied carbon and actions to increase
material reuse and use of carbonsequestering materials; and
› Encourage land use and economic development
policies that support neighborhood retail and
Boston-based startups, to build a local, circular
economy that allows residents to meet all of their
basic needs close to home and to live car-free.
16 DECARBONIZE THE CONSUMPTION OF
BOSTON RESIDENTS AND BUSINESSES
Buying used is one of many ways to reduce our personal carbon impact. A consumption-based inventory can
improve our understanding of how to best reduce emissions from the items we use in our everyday lives.
© Katherine Eshel
2019 Boston CAP Update | A Carbon-Free Community 79
The City of Boston has prioritized making
responsible investments that reflect our values
and benefit our neighborhoods. In February 2019,
Mayor Walsh launched the Environmental, Social,
Governance (ESG) Investment Initiative to invest
up to $150 million of City operating funds in the
short-term fixed income securities of companies
that maintain strong corporate ESG practices.
The City of Boston also joined the Ceres Investor
Network as a means to facilitate corporate
engagement around environmental practices.
In the next five years, the City will also take
the following steps to continue to decarbonize
municipal operations:
› Monitor the performance of the ESG Investment
Initiative;
› Update our guidelines for environmentally
preferable procurement (EPP), also
sometimes called “green purchasing”; and
› Explore incorporating ESG principles into
management of the City of Boston pension and
trust funds.
17 GREEN MUNICIPAL INVESTMENTS
The Carbon Free Boston analysis estimated that
Boston is able to reduce emissions by more than
90 percent by 2050. But 10 percent of emissions
may remain from fuel use or processes that are too
costly or difficult to decarbonize with current-day
technology. Our ability to address this remainder
will probably improve in the next 30 years, but we
still need to think about offsets.
Carbon offsets are certificates that represent a
metric ton of carbon that is permanently reduced,
avoided, or removed from the atmosphere. An
independent third party verifies the offset, which
may then be sold or retired. By retiring an offset, an
emitter can claim to have negated a ton of carbon.
In the next five years, the City of Boston will take
steps to:
› Develop guidelines for carbon offsets for future
City policies and programs;
› Explore a local carbon offsets market in
partnership with neighboring municipalities and
regional partners; and
› Evaluate the role of urban forestry and resilience
benefits of local carbon offsets.
18 DEVELOP A VALUES-BASED
FRAMEWORK FOR CARBON OFFSETS
80 2019 Boston CAP Update | A Carbon-Free Community
© Marco Verch
2019 Boston CAP Update | Acknowledgments 81
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The 2019 Climate Action Plan Update was made possible by the contributions of dedicated City staff,
community, non-profit and private sector organizations, and Boston residents.
WORKING GROUP PARTICIPANTS
Alexandra Smith
128 Business Council
Kathryn Carlson
A Better City
Yve Torrie
A Better City
Amelia Youngstrom
Action for Boston Community
Development
James Collins
Action for Boston Community
Development
Lisa Frantzis
Advanced Energy Economy
Gabe Shapiro
All In Energy
Anna Leslie
Allston-Brighton Health Collaborative
Ashley Tibett
Alternatives for Community &
Environment
Hajar Logan
Alternatives for Community &
Environment
Mela Miles
Alternatives for Community &
Environment
Richard Juang
Alternatives for Community &
Environment
Lisa Jacobson
Barr Foundation
Shanna Cleveland
Barr Foundation
Rickie Harvey
Boston Clean Energy Coalition and
West Roxbury Saves Energy
Andrew Wells-Bean
Boston Climate Action Network
George Henderson
Boston Climate Action Network
Linda Hirsch
Boston Climate Action Network
Michael Prokosch
Boston Climate Action Network
Christopher Donnelly
Boston Green Academy
Jacqueline Novicki
Boston Green Academy
Kayla Arreaga
Boston Green Academy
Litsch Prinston
Boston Green Academy
Simon Chernow
Boston Green Academy
Alice Brown
Boston Harbor Now
Alice Brown
Boston Harbor Now
Magdalena Ayed
Boston Harborkeepers
Andrea Love
Boston Society of Architects
Ahria Ilyas
Boston Student Advisory Council
Ebun Osinubi
Boston Student Advisory Council
Henry Swiman
Boston Student Advisory Council
Henry Swiman
Boston Student Advisory Council
Malik Bullock
Boston Student Advisory Council
Stanley Aneke
Boston Student Advisory Council
Wellington Matos
Boston Student Advisory Council
Scott Palmer
Builders and Remodelers Association
of Greater Boston
Mary Vogel
Building Pathways
Lisa Owens
City Life/Vida Urbana
Oliver Sellers Garcia
City of Somerville
Michael Green
Climate Xchange
Bronwyn Cooke
City of Cambridge
Stephanie Groll
City of Cambridge
Seth Federspiel
City of Cambridge
Hannah Payne
City of Somerville
Danilo Morales
Codman Square Neighborhood
Development Council
Collique Williams
Community Labor United
Staci Rubin
Conservation Law Foundation
Gokce Akin-Olcum
Environmental Defense Fund
Liz Delaney
Environmental Defense Fund
82 2019 Boston CAP Update | Acknowledgments
Eric Wilkinson
Environmental League of
Massachusetts
William Stack
Eversource
Jon Coleman
Ford
Matthew Raifman
Ford
Meredith Outterson
Greater Boston Interfaith
Organization
Patricia Baumer
Greater Boston Real Estate Board
Loie Hayes
Green Energy Consumers Alliance
Amy Longsworth
Green Ribbon Commission
Magdalena Ayed
Harborkeepers
Caroleen Verly
Harvard University Office of
Sustainability
Heather Henriksen
Harvard University Office of
Sustainability
Jaclyn Olsen
Harvard University Office of
Sustainability
Hubert Murray
Health Care Without Harm
Scott Mullen
Lime
Stacy Thompson
LiveableStreets Alliance
Emily Jones
Local Initiatives Support Corporation
(LISC) Boston
Ben Sisko
Lyft
Jan Henderson
MASCO
Betsy Harper
Massachusetts Department of Housing
and Community Development
Simone Early
Massachusetts Department of Housing
and Community Development
Daniel Sullivan
Massachusetts Department of
Transportation
Katherine Fichter
Massachusetts Department of
Transportation
Hong-Hanh Chu
Massachusetts Executive Office of
Energy and Environmental Affairs
Nerali Patel
Massport
Brian Doherty
Metro Boston Trades Council
Cameron Peterson
Metropolitan Area Planning Council
Kasia Hart
Metropolitan Area Planning Council
Megan Aki
Metropolitan Area Planning Council
Jeff Rosenblum
MIT Urban Mobility Lab
Andee Krasner
Mothers Out Front
Edith Buhs
Mothers Out Front
Anastasia Nicolaou
NAIOP Massachusetts
Stephanie Kruel
NAIOP Massachusetts
Tamara Small
NAIOP Massachusetts
Philip Giffee
Neighborhood of Affordable Housing
Lauren Baumann
New Ecology
Mariama White-Hammond
New Roots AME
John Balfe
Northeast Energy Efficiency
Partnerships
Maria Meijburg
nuTonomy
Julie Klump
Preservation of Affordable Housing
Frank Mruk
Roxbury Community College
Kevin Hepner
Roxbury Community College
Patricia Puszko
Seaport TMA
Jacob Walther
Sierra Club
Michele Brooks
Sierra Club
Veena Dharmaraj
Sierra Club
Emily Lewis
Sociedad Latina
Harvey Michaels
Temple Israel
Norm Lamonde
Turner Construction Company
Meredith Elbaum
USGBC - MA Chapter
Justin Hank
Veolia
Ned Bartlett
Veolia
Adi Nochur
Walk Boston
Lisa Cunningham
Warner Cunningham
Aajia Hall
Youth On Board
Jen Wishnie
Youth On Board
Jenny Sazama
Youth On Board
Carlota Melo
Zipcar
2019 Boston CAP Update | Acknowledgments 83
STEERING COMMITTEE
Christopher Cook
Office of Environment, Energy and
Open Space
Kristopher Carter
Office of New Urban Mechanics
Adam Cederbaum
Law Department
Katie Choe
Public Works Department
John Feuerbach
Department of Neighborhood
Development
Jonathan Greeley
Boston Planning & Development
Agency
Vineet Gupta
Boston Transportation Department
Dion Irish
Inspectional Services Department
Tricia Lyons
Public Facilities Department
Richard McGuiness
Boston Planning and Development
Agency
Midori Morikawa
Office of Economic Development
Gregory Rooney
Boston Transportation Department
David Urkevich
Budget Office
CITY OF BOSTON DEPARTMENTS
Age Strong Commission
Boston Planning & Development
Agency
Boston Public Schools
Boston Transportation
Department
Department of Neighborhood
Development
Environment Department
Public Facilities Department
Public Works Department
Office of Budget and
Management
Office of Environment, Energy
and Open Space
Office of Equity and Inclusion
Office of New Urban Mechanics
Office of Policy
Office of Resilience and Racial
Equity
Office of Workforce Development
Operations
CITY OF BOSTON STAFF
ENVIRONMENT DEPARTMENT
Katherine Eshel (Lead)
Alison Brizius
Nicholas Armata
Susan Cascino
David Corbie
Joseph Cornish
Rory Cuddyer
Rosanne Foley
Christopher Kramer
Joseph Larusso
Lourdes Lopez
Alex Mireku
Nicholas Moreno
David Musselman
Brenda Pike
Peyton Siler Jones
Benjamin Silverman
Carl Spector
Bradford Swing
Lauren Zingarelli
Maura Zlody
84 2019 Boston CAP Update | Acknowledgments
CITY OF BOSTON STAFF (CONT.)
PUBLIC FACILITIES DEPARTMENT
Evan Brinkman Paul Donnelly Michael Soucy
TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT
Samantha Devine
Tyler Lew
Matthew Moran
Alaa Mukahhal
Lindiwe Rennert
Stefanie Seskin
Matthew Warfield
BOSTON PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Michael Christopher
John Dalzell
Manuel Esquivel
Richard McGuinness
Kathleen Pedersen
DEPARTMENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT
Joseph Backer
Jessica Boatwright
John Feuerbach
Jay Lee
OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Matthew Bradley
Sean Chen
William Coughlin
Sabrina Dorsainvil
Naida Faria
Nicholas O'Neill
Stacia Sheputa
Lexi Smith
Kim Thai-Durrigan
Natasha White
CONSULTANT SUPPORT
Vanasse Hangen Brustlin Kim Lundgren Associates Archipelago Strategies Group
2019 Boston CAP Update | Acknowledgments 85
APPENDIX
The following reports are referenced in this Plan and may be found on the City of Boston website:
› 2014 Climate Action Plan Update Progress Report
› 2017 Community Greenhouse Gas Inventory Report
ABBREVIATIONS
APCC Air Pollution Control Commission
BCYF Boston Center for Youth and Families
BERDO Building Energy Reporting and Disclosure
Ordinance
BOC Building Operator Certification
BPDA Boston Planning & Development Agency
BPS Boston Public Schools
BTD Boston Transportation Department
BHA Boston Housing Authority
CDC Community Development Corporation
DoIT Department of Innovation and Technology
E+ Energy positive
EV Electric vehicle
GWSA Global Warming Solutions Act
MAPC Metropolitan Area Planning Council
MassDEP Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection
MassDOT Massachusetts Department of
Transportation
MWDBE Minority, Women, and Disadvantaged
Business Enterprise
RFP Request for Proposals
RMV Registry of Motor Vehicles
TDM Travel Demand Management
TMA Transportation Management Association
ZEV Zero-Emission Vehicle
ZNC Zero Net Carbon
ZNE Zero Net Energy
PHOTO CREDIT
Cover photo by Vera Izrailit.
Boston à l'heure bleue (p. 33) by Emmanuel
Huybrechts. License.
Joe Moakley Park in Boston (pg. 80) by Marco Verch.
License.
Aerial photography of Boston Common (pg. 86-87)
by Marco Verch. License.
86 2019 Boston CAP Update |
2019 Boston CAP Update | 87
2019 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN UPDATE
City of Boston
MAYOR MARTIN J. WALSH