A Priority List for
Climate Action in New Orleans
Net Zero by 2050:
December 2022
Introduction
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a collection of climate
scientists assembled by the United Nations, released a report in 2021
detailing the “unprecedented” pace of climate change. The report
outlined the catastrophic impacts that lie ahead unless humans quickly
cut greenhouse gas emissions. The IPCC report called for a reduction
in greenhouse gas emissions globally of at least 45% by 2030, and to
achieve net-zero emission by 2050.
In response to this crisis, the City of New Orleans has joined the State
of Louisiana, the Biden-Harris adminstration, and thousands of cities
worldwide to set a science-based target to reduce climate pollution.
Climate action planning is an iterative process in which we plan,
implement, monitor, and adjust continuously as we learn. It is led by the
City but not done solely by government. Collaboration with residents,
businesses, non-profits, and advocacy groups is critical to implementing
meaningful change.
This plan refreshes our priorities and provides an update since the
City’s first Climate Action Plan was released in 2017. A draft of this plan
was shared with stakeholders in 2022. The Office of Resilience and
Sustainability reviewed and incorporated that feedback into this final
plan you are reading now.
Thank you for your time.
1
As we emerge from the COVID-19 crisis and work
to heal our community and rebuild our economy,
we are returning our attention to another global
crisis that disproportionately threatens our city.
New Orleans is on the frontlines of climate
change. The devastation from Hurricane Ida last
year reminded us of the risks of an increasingly
volatile climate and the need to build strong
and lasting infrastructure that can adapt. We
have a momentous opportunity before us now
as we ramp up our economic recovery to make
climate change central to our considerations. By
integrating initiatives that reduce our greenhouse
gas emissions and help the City adapt to climate
change into our economic agenda, we can
create new, environmentally-friendly economic
opportunities that reduce our risk and improve
the long-term health and vitality of our city.
We are building upon our previous work and
further defining our priorities. We launched the
world’s first comprehensive city resilience strategy
in 2015 to confront our most urgent threats, adapt
our city to our changing natural environment,
invest in equity, create flexible and reliable
systems, and prepare for future shocks. We built
upon this strategy to release the City’s first climate
action plan in 2017, joining cities around the world
in a commitment to uphold the goals of the Paris
Agreement and do our part to limit global warming
to 1.5 °C (2.7°F) above pre-industrial levels. In that
plan, we focused on how the City could reduce
its contribution to climate change with targeted
actions in the areas of energy, transportation,
waste, and cultural awareness and action.
In 2018, my administration — in partnership with
the Greater New Orleans Foundation — expanded
community participation with the Climate Action
Equity Working Group (CAEWG) to explore how the
challenges of climate change are heightened by
social inequity. The CAEWG led a series of public
meetings and provided recommendations on
how to implement climate action in New Orleans
more equitably, and those recommendations are
reflected in this updated plan.
Now in 2022, this Climate Action update affirms
our goals and provides a refresh of our strategic
priorities. In the context of a renewed national
focus to catalyze action on the climate crisis
and the creation of the first climate plan for the
State of Louisiana, this update keeps us focused
on reducing community-wide greenhouse gas
emissions and adapting to climate change.
With this update, I establish the City’s goal of netzero emissions by 2050 and adjust our interim
goal to reduce emissions 50% by 2035 to align
with key national targets and planned actions
related to decarbonizing the grid, electrifying
transportation, and reducing energy use.
We are a community like no other with a unique
culture and a vibrant heritage, and we have
the privilege and responsibility to sustain and
preserve one of the most important, beautiful and
dynamic places in the United States. We all want
a safer city, with affordable and renewable energy,
reliable and efficient transportation, healthy air,
and green jobs that create opportunities for our
residents. Making New Orleans a vibrant and
thriving city — that’s what we’re about.
To our future,
Mayor LaToya Cantrell
Setting Priorities: A Statement from
Mayor LaToya Cantrell
2
Background
In this 2022 Climate Action update, we have
honed our goals and selected strategies to focus
attention and resources to where we have the
most opportunity for impact, either directly
within the City’s jurisdiction or by working with
partners. Coming out of the COVID-19 crisis, we
must rebuild our community and diversify our
economy, and these climate action strategies
provide clear opportunities to transform our
city for a more sustainable future.
This is a pivotal moment for climate action
in the United States and Louisiana and much
is still unfolding. In 2021, the Biden-Harris
administration announced the nation’s new
commitment to reduce carbon emissions by 50%
from 2005 levels by 2030. This was followed
by two ambitious federal bills designed to
upgrade our nation’s infrastructure and combat
the climate crisis. In January 2022, Louisiana
Governor John Bel Edwards’ Climate Initiatives
Task Force approved the state’s first ever Climate
Action Plan and set Louisiana’s goal for net-zero
carbon emissions by 2050. When the City wrote
the 2017 Climate Action Plan, there were no
similar state and national actions upon which to
rely for support and leadership. Moreover, private
sector action on climate change has accelerated in
the last few years as well, with more corporations
committing to reducing emissions and creating
products and services that help all of us combat
climate change. Now is the time for New Orleans
to accelerate our action on the climate crisis
and create opportunities in the new economy
for our city.
3
American Community Survey Snapshot 2019 New Orleans Louisiana United States
Population
Total Population 390,144 4,648,794 328,239,523
Population Growth: April 1, 2010–July 1, 2019 13.50% 2.50% 6.30%
Households: 2015–2019 153,819 1,739,497 120,756,048
Characteristics
Persons Under 18 20.10% 23.40% 22.30%
Persons 65 years and over 14.10% 15.90% 16.50%
Female Persons 52.50% 51.20% 50.80%
Foreign Born Persons: 2015–2019 5.50% 4.20% 13.60%
With a disability, under age 65 years, 2015–2019 10.50% 11.10% 8.60%
Persons without health insurance, under age 65 10.60% 10.50% 9.50%
Race
Black 59.50% 32.80% 13.40%
White 33.90% 62.80% 76.30%
Hispanic or Latino 5.50% 5.30% 18.50%
Asian 2.90% 1.80% 5.90%
American Indian and Alaska Native 0.20% 0.80% 1.30%
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander 0.00% 0.10% 0.20%
Two or more races 1.90% 1.80% 2.80%
Families and Living Arrangements
Owner Occupied housing unit rate, 2015–2019 48.30% 65.60% 64.00%
Language other than English spoken at home,
percent of persons age 5 years+, 2015–2019 8.30% 8% 21.60%
Households with a computer, 2015–2019 85.10% 85.60% 90.30%
Households with a broadband Internet
subscription, 2015–2019 73.40% 75.50% 82.70%
Education
High school graduate or higher, percent of
persons age 25 years+, 2015–2019 86.50% 85.20% 88.00%
Bachelor’s degree or higher, percent of persons
age 25 years+, 2015–2019 37.60% 24.10% 32.10%
Income and Economy
Median household income (in 2019 dollars),
2015–2019 $41,604 $49,469 $62,843
Per capita income in past 12 months (in 2019
dollars), 2015–2019 $31,385 $27,923 $34,103
In civilian labor force, population age 16 years+,
2015–2019 61.70% 59.10% 63%
Persons in poverty 23.70% 19% 10.50%
Geography and Transportation
Population per square mile, 2010 2,029.40 104.9 87.4
Land area in square miles 169.42 43,203.90 3,531,905.43
Mean travel time to work (minutes),
workers age 16 years+ 24.2 25.7 26.9
City Context
4
Climate Risks and Hazards
The City recently adopted its updated Hazard
Mitigation Plan in September 2021, which
outlines the city’s climate and associated
infrastructure risks in great detail. That plan
should be read in conjunction with this update.
A few key elements of risk specifically related
to climate change from the 2017 Climate Action
Plan are highlighted here as well.
For New Orleans, climate change is not a
future scenario, but a current reality. South
Louisiana is already facing many challenges
caused or worsened by climate change due
to our unique geography. Sea level rise and a
projected increase in the intensity of weather
events are expected to accelerate coastal
land loss—increasing storm surge exposure
while adding greater stresses to our levee and
flood protection systems. While the state of
Louisiana’s 2017 Coastal Master Plan from the
Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority
(CPRA) set an ambitious path to respond
to changes in our coastal system, it also
acknowledged that we cannot sustain a goal
of “no net loss” of our coastal wetlands with
updated projections of much higher sea level
rise than previously anticipated resulting from
climate change.
Climate change is projected to cause greater
intensity in storm events, including hurricanes
and severe storms, that can cause flood and wind
damage. Flooding due to intense rainfall and the
limited capacity of pipes and pumps causes direct
damage to roadways, homes, businesses, and
infrastructure, and can hamper both emergency
response and recovery efforts. As the city’s
soft soils become saturated and the drainage
network reaches capacity during severe storms,
the interdependencies of the City’s utilities
mean that effects can spread across multiple
systems. Waterlogged soils, in conjunction with
high winds, often result in downed trees and
power lines, leading to outages that compromise
the City’s energy-dependent stormwater and
wastewater pumping facilities and significantly
increase the period of power interruption.
Changing rainfall patterns may also result in
longer dry stretches, which could exacerbate
problems with shallow subsidence that reduce
the longevity of infrastructure.
Meanwhile, more extreme heat episodes will
directly threaten the health of our residents
and the reliability of infrastructure systems
that supply us with energy and water. The
record heat we have experienced over the past
few years causes higher concentrations of air
pollutants and greater amounts of ozone in
our urban areas and accelerates the spread of
allergens, exacerbating respiratory illnesses and
allergy problems alongside the increased threat
of heat stroke. A study from Climate Central
further showed that some areas of the city act
as “heat islands”, sometimes up to eight degrees
hotter than other areas of the city due to a lack
of green space and shade. These areas of sparse
green space are generally our socially vulnerable
neighborhoods. A sustained warmer climate
also increases the risk of vector-borne diseases
such as malaria, dengue fever, and Zika virus.
Additionally, we have experienced increased
cold snaps and volatility in winter weather in the
last few years, putting more stress on our aging
infrastructure.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory
Greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) are the primary
cause of global warming and climate change.
These emissions largely derive from burning
fossil fuels for energy and transportation and the
decomposition of our waste. The City completed
inventories of community-wide emissions for
the years 2014 and 2017. The 2014 inventory
estimated 3.6 million metric tons of CO2e and
the 2017 indicated a small reduction to 3.5 million
metric tons of CO2e. The refreshed priority list
and goals laid out in this document are based on
the 2017 inventory as it is more recent.
5
The City is actively compiling its 2021 inventory
and will be releasing a progress report on it in
early 2023.
The inventories were assembled according
to the Global Protocol for Community-Scale
Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories (GPC), a
reporting standard developed for cities by the
World Resources Institute (WRI), C40 Cities
and ICLEI-Local Governments for Sustainability
(ICLEI). The inventory summarizes communityscale greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions that
result from processes and activities occurring
within the boundaries of Orleans Parish as
organized in three sectors: stationary energy,
transportation, and waste. This inventory does
not include emissions as a result of industrial
processes, agriculture and forestry, aviation, and
off-road transportation. The City uses emissions
reporting to the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency and the Louisiana Department of
Environmental Quality for some information,
but cannot rely only on a direct measurement
of GHG emissions at their source; therefore,
this inventory employs a calculation-based
methodology that involves the conversion of
GHG-inducing activities into emissions based on
specific emissions factors.
Climate Goals
The City of New Orleans aims to achieve net
zero GHG emissions by 2050. By net zero, the
City means it aims to reduce emissions as much
as it can, and “zero out” any remaining emissions
with reductions elsewhere, thereby achieving
zero emissions with both of those calculations.
Net zero emissions is also referred to as carbon
neutrality. Emissions that remain after the City’s
actions are implemented are residual emissions.
The City will continue to update its plans
and seek new ways to reduce these residual
emissions directly. This may include continued
use of offsets representing commensurate
emissions reductions elsewhere and negative
emissions approaches such as natural carbon
sequestration through tree plantings and
expanded green space. In June 2022, the City
Council passed Resolution R-22-219 to prohibit the
development of carbon capture and sequestration
facilities and pipelines within the City.
In the 2017 Climate Action Plan, the City set a
goal to reduce GHG emissions 50% by 2030.
In this update, we establish the 2050 goal and
revise the City’s interim goal to reduce emissions
50% by 2035. This shift to 2035 enables the
City to align with critically important national
actions and market trends such as the BidenHarris administration goal to clean the nation’s
electricity grid by 2035, and related goals to
accelerate energy efficiency and renewable
energy deployment, transition to low- and
no-emission vehicles, and generally invest in
climate-forward infrastructure and technologies.
This revised interim goal of a 50% emissions
reduction by 2035 is based on modeling climate
actions which are within the City’s control, but
also considers the barriers the City faces to
achieve the previous goal of a 50% emissions
reduction by 2030. The City also modeled an
extended scenario that does achieve the 50%
reduction by 2030 if those barriers, such as EV
adoption or grid cleaning rates, were removed.
While we believe the 2035 target is more feasible
at this moment, we will continue to lead by example
and facilitate others to take actions to achieve
the original 2030 goal. When the City releases
its GHG progress report in early 2023, we will
include information on this extended scenario
model as well as the barrier analysis we conducted.
A carbon-free grid and use of carbon-free energy
in our buildings and transportation are the most
critical actions we can take to substantially
reduce emissions in the time frame necessary
to do our part to avert the worst effects of the
climate crisis. The goal in our 2017 plan depended
on a carbon-free grid by 2030, but subsequent
City Council efforts to enact necessary regulatory
policies determined that 2040 was the earliest
it could be achieved with local action alone.
Thus, President Biden’s goal to decarbonize the
national grid by 2035 supports the City and we
will continue to look to additional federal and new
state actions from Governor Edwards’ Climate
Initiatives Task Force. We will update our climate
action planning every five years, and will update
our goals and trajectories accordingly and more
frequently as we are able.
Our goals for net zero by 2050 and 50%
reduction by 2035 are set on a 2017 baseline.
This is important to consider when comparing
the City’s goal to the national goal and target
setting based on scientific work from the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). For example, the recent U.S. national
declaration to reduce emissions by 50–52% is
aligned to a 2005 baseline, while the Special
Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR15)
outlines the need for a 45% reduction in global
50% by 2035 | Net-Zero by 2050
6
Reduction Trajectory: 2035 and 2050
Emissions reductions scenarios were calculated
using the C40 Pathways tool, which uses the City’s
GHG inventory and the selected local strategies to
forecast emissions reductions into the future. The
adjacent chart shows the relative reduction share
for each sector for each time period and it should
be noted that they are connected, as cleaning
the grid unlocks reductions in both energy and
transportation. Summary information about these
reductions scenarios will be made available for
analysis as a part of our climate action dashboard
by the end of 2023.
The City calculated estimates for carbon
sequestration potential related to its treeplanting goals, which addressed 9% of emissions
in 2035 and 28% in 2050, leaving about 5%
residual emissions in 2050. Calculating emissions
reduction values for trees can be challenging
because a tree’s ability to sequester carbon can
increase substantially over time as trees grow,
emissions by 2030 on a 2010 baseline. Due
to significant population decrease following
Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the City’s GHG
emissions in 2005 and earlier were much
higher than they are today and that reduction,
along with these goals, aligns the City with the
overall U.S. goal. In 2010, while the city was
still in recovery, the City population was about
13% less than it is today. In recent years, the
City population has stabilized and economic
activity reflects a more sustained local economy
not driven by re-building and other recovery
stabilization. These goals are ambitious for the
City given local resources and constraints.
The City’s refreshed climate action priorities
are outlined in this update. Related estimated
reductions for core strategies have been
modeled in the chart below, showing which
strategies are expected to drive what share of
reductions by 2035 and 2050. Strategies have
not been prioritized solely based on emissions
reductions. While that is a key consideration,
we have also continued to factor the “resilience
value” for each strategy as discussed in the 2017
Climate Action Plan. These values are the cobenefits the strategy provides beyond climate
action such as economic opportunity, public
health (e.g. cleaner air), and equity.
Emission reduction potential of selected actions
Legend: Hidden
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
6,000,000
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
tonnes/CO2 e/year
National/Regional Actions
District heating
Electricity Generation
AFOLU – Agriculture, Forestry
 and Other Land Use
Waste
IPPU— Industrial Processes
 and Product Use
UrbanPlanning
Baseline Forecast
Target Trajectory
Remaining Emissions
Transportation–Fuel
Industrial Energy–Eciency
Transportation
Industrial–Fuel switch
Building Energy –Fuel switch
Building Energy –Eciency
Estimated Reduction Potential from
Key Actions to Meet the 2035 and 2050 Goals
Strategy 2017–2035
Reductions
2035–2050
Reductions
Energy 43% 29%
Transportation 45% 36%
Waste 3% 2%
Trees/Offsets 9% 33%
TOTAL 100% 100%
7
own &
operate
set & enforce
policies
budgetary
control set vision influence
Private Buildings
Public Buildings
Energy Supply
Finance & Economy
City Budget
Public Transport
Private Vehicles
City Roads
State Roads
Urban Land Use
Parks & Public Spaces
Waste
Drinking Water
Drainage
Mayoral Function Council Function
City Function
(Mayor, City Departments,
and City Council)
Shared Function
(City and Non-City) Non-City Function
Related to its powers, the City must contend
with various barriers to its ability to act that
can preclude it from reducing emissions. These
barriers include influence but not direct control
over the City’s public transit fleet, and influence
but not control over private vehicles or travel
modes and therefore few opportunities to
directly limit emissions. Additionally, the City
has influence but lacks authority on business
waste management decisions and an inability to
eliminate the use of natural gas due to a state
law passed in 2020. Other more general and
equally important barriers include lack of funds
to resource certain necessary actions. The City’s
ability to accelerate climate action is dependent
on leadership and funding from the national and
state government and coordination with various
regional and City agencies, as well as the
interest and action of residents and businesses
to make climate change a central consideration
in various decision-making.
but also varies substantially with the type and
health of the tree. Estimates must calculate these
various specific tree details as well as consider
potential loss rates and other dynamic factors.
As outlined in this update, the City is beginning
more comprehensive work to understand the
value of trees in this capacity and increase the
community-wide tree canopy. Therefore, we
have categorized the tree-related estimates
and offsets together in one category, and will
continue to refine our work in this area and our
reduction strategies and estimates overall, and
provide future updates with more refined data
as we have it.
City Powers and Barriers
The city has assorted powers over many aspects
of city life in which climate action can happen. In
some instances the Mayor has stronger powers,
such as over the City budget or infrastructure,
and in other cases City Council has stronger
powers, such as over the energy supply and
regulating Entergy New Orleans (ENO), our local
utility, and in many cases they must work jointly
together. A few key areas for local climate action
are not directly controlled, led, or regulated by
the City and the Mayor and City Council must
work from positions of influence to advance the
City’s goals and vision. These include regional
transportation planning and transit led by the
Regional Planning Commission and Regional
Transit Authority, drainage, drinking water and
wastewater infrastructure under management at
the Sewerage and Water Board (SWB), and waste
management and recycling for businesses and
large buildings. The chart below outlines areas of
City power related to climate action.
8
SETTING PRIORITIES: A SUMMARY OF ACTIONS
The following is a brief description and summary chart of key climate action priorities for the City
going forward. These include specific sector areas for reductions — energy, transportation and waste — 
and two cross-cutting areas related to economic development as well as adaptation and naturebased solutions. These priorities represent climate actions which have proven emissions reductions
results and were selected by key City staff, in consultation with our implementation partners and
climate policy experts over the last year. A draft of this plan was circulated widely among local
climate action non-governmental organizations, key governmental and utility agencies and internal
City staff for feedback. The plan was updated in late 2022 to reflect that feedback. Beneath each
priority, we list the co-benefits the strategy provides beyond climate action such as economic
opportunity, public health, and equity. The key climate action priorities, all of equal importance, are:
 Ramp Up the Local Climate Action Economy  Waste
 Energy  Adaptation & Nature-Based Solutions
 Transportation
RAMP UP THE LOCAL CLIMATE ACTION ECONOMY
Global attention is increasingly being paid to the climate crisis with more than 400 of the world’s
largest companies committing to net zero emissions by 2050 and more ambitious goals from
nations leading up to the most recent global climate meeting, COP27, held in November 2022.
China recently proposed to reduce its nationwide emissions to net zero by 2060, and President
Biden has committed the U.S. to a 50–52% reduction by 2030 and net zero by 2050, with
Congress passing the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) and the Inflation Reduction
Act (IRA) that will accelerate climate action with historic federal investments. Now is the time
to build local capacity for climate-forward businesses, jobs, and projects so that New Orleans
can be well-positioned to take part in this generational economic transformation. The City has
several key strategies to ramp up investment in the local climate action economy and unlock more
opportunities as related sectors grow.
 DIVEST CITY’S INVESTMENTS IN FOSSIL FUELS AND INVEST
IN CLEAN ENERGY AND CLIMATE SOLUTIONS
 Economic Opportunity
In September 2020, Mayor Cantrell coordinated
with C40 Cities and twelve other mayors from
cities around the world including New York,
London, Capetown, Pittsburgh, Seattle, and
Milan to declare a commitment to divest from
fossil fuels and invest in a sustainable future.
With this commitment to leverage the City’s
financial resources for a more equitable and
sustainable economy, the City will prioritize
investments in clean energy and other climate
solutions. To accomplish this, the City will
present divestment and investment policy
recommendations to the New Orleans Municipal
Employee’s Retirement System board in 2023,
with the hopes that the board will adopt a policy
mandate with a goal of full divestiture by 2025.
 ESTABLISH A REGIONAL GREEN BANK WITH FINANCE NEW ORLEANS (FNO)
 Economic Opportunity Equity
Green Banks are mission-driven institutions
that use innovative financing to accelerate the
transition to clean energy and fight climate
change. By leveraging public investment and
resources, green banks help communities
overcome barriers and attract private capital
to increase investment in green projects such
as renewable energy, energy efficiency, water
management and green infrastructure. These
institutions have been successful throughout
the United States at the city, regional, and state
level. Here in New Orleans, we are exploring how
the City can work with Finance New Orleans
(FNO) to coordinate similar investments with
regional agencies and support local businesses.
9
FNO has been working since 2018 to expand its
mission from a sole focus on affordable housing
to coordinate with the City and other agencies
to “improve the quality of life in the City of
New Orleans by investing in affordable housing,
economic development, and climate resilience
projects that produce quality jobs and wealth
for residents.” With this expansion of vision,
FNO has added green mortgages to its portfolio
of offerings, increased focus on supporting
affordable housing developers, and started
the Resilient New Orleans Finance Working
Group, a collaboration with multiple regional
agencies to identify and finance projects with
climate benefits, such as solar development,
energy efficiency and green infrastructure. In
2020, FNO joined the American Green Bank
Consortium, which seeks to connect similar
efforts nationwide to accelerate innovative clean
energy investment across the United States.
Additional investments for these initiatives
will be funded from a portion of the Inflation
Reduction Act, which includes a $27 billion
Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund that will
support national and local green banks.
FNO has a $1 billion economic impact goal
by 2030 alongside the City’s net zero goals.
This figure includes all of the public and private
investment related to sustainable housing and
infrastructure projects. More info about FNO
and their green bank plans can be found here.
 PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS PRACTICES AND JOBS
 Economic Opportunity Equity
Adapting our infrastructure to our changing
climate not only offers greater resilience to storms
and flooding, but also is a key opportunity to
expand our local economy. By promoting the
engagement of local businesses in our blue
and green economy, our city becomes more
sustainable— environmentally and economically.
In 2015, the City launched BuildNOLA to
help train and build capacity for small and
disadvantaged businesses and ensure that our
local blue and green economy is equitable and
accessible to our local businesses. In its review
of the City’s 2017 Climate Action Plan, the
Climate Action Equity Working Group (CAEWG)
recommended that the City pay additional
attention to encouraging more DBE participation
in climate action work and to attracting
more African-American residents to jobs and
businesses in the climate action economy.
The City has worked with partners to address
this recommendation, collaborating with the
Greater New Orleans Foundation on a report
that explores opportunities and barriers for
more equitable access to green infrastructure
jobs created by the City’s major resilience
projects, Economic Opportunity through Green
Infrastructure: Equitable Access to Jobs and
Contracts in Greater New Orleans.
Additionally in November 2020, the City,
along with the New Orleans Business Alliance
(NOLABA), a local economic and workforce
development organization, and YouthForce
NOLA, a local non-profit focused on career
pathways for high school students, was
selected to participate in JP Morgan Chase’s
AdvancingCities Challenge. AdvancingCities
is a 3-year, $5M grant that the City is using
to develop a robust blue/green infrastructure
workforce training pipeline that prepares high
school youth, opportunity youth, people of color,
and low-income residents for high-wage jobs in
the City’s growing water management sector,
AdvancingCities also provides small business
support and policy and systems change.
The Cantrell administration is also working
with our partners to make more opportunities
available for our local contractors. The City, led
by the Parks & Parkways, Workforce Development,
Economic Development departments, as
well as NOLABA and community workforce
development groups, is creating a green
infrastructure maintenance plan that includes
our contract “debundling” process, where we
identify projects where it is possible to create
smaller-value projects. For instance, issuing
10
Adapting our infrastructure to our changing climate
not only offers greater resilience to storms and flooding,
but also is a key opportunity to expand
our local economy.
maintenance contracts for just bioswales or rain
gardens within a larger project that includes
multiple types of green infrastructure. By
creating smaller contracts, it gives our small and
often minority-owned businesses opportunities
to win City contracts, helping those firms build
expertise and grow their operations.
One of the first projects the city has used this
“debundling” method with is the Community
Adaptation Program (CAP), in partnership with
the New Orleans Redevelopment Authority (NORA).
The Community Adaptation Program provided
a $5 million investment in residential stormwater
management improvements to owner-occupied
single family homes with household incomes
at or below 80% of area median income
located within the Gentilly Resilience District,
a section of the City with historically AfricanAmerican-owned residences. The program
diverts and detains stormwater runoff on
over 200 properties with an average grant
award between $10,000 and $25,000. The
improvements are designed and installed at no
cost to the homeowner. Small contractors are
often retained for these contracts.
The City and partners will also establish
coordinated technical assistance, training,
incubation, acceleration, capital access, and
talent development programs for small and
disadvantaged businesses to position firms led
by people of color to benefit from procurement
opportunities in the water management sector
and beyond. As a part of the Gentilly Resilience
District, the City secured $3M to train local
residents in green infrastructure and water
management. The City’s Office of Workforce
Development is partnering with Parks &
Parkways and Delgado Community College to
train individuals for horticulture certificates, as
well as additional partnerships with Thrive New
Orleans and LA Green Corps on a Climate Corps
green job training program.
The City is also focused on making our economy
ready for the clean energy transition. Recently,
GNO Inc., southeast Louisiana’s economic
development agency, developed H2theFuture,
a transformative energy cluster strategy based
on green hydrogen, to assist with decarbonizing
the South Louisiana industrial corridor. With our
region’s historical background in oil and gas,
focusing on green hydrogen and offshore wind
energy can ensure that our City gains new jobs
from the coming energy transition.
Additionally, the University of New Orleans
created the Louisiana Wind Energy Hub at
UNO with the goal of accelerating the growth
of the state’s wind energy ecosystem. The Hub
will support emerging wind energy companies,
spur the development of new technologies, and
supply trained professionals to the field. New
Orleans and its regional and federal partners
are charting a new path in the development,
storage, and transmission of offshore wind
energy, which is poised to become an important
economic driver for our region.
As part of its effort to grow the local climate
action economy, the City will make climate
impacts a consideration in its purchasing
decisions to prioritize products and services
that reduce the City’s impact. These may include
preferencing recycled paper, low-flow fixtures
and LED light bulbs and will also extend to larger
procurement decisions such as computers and
other equipment. The City will evaluate its current
purchasing practices and develop guidelines
for sustainable purchasing and centralized
processes and tracking by the end of 2024.
 MAKE CLIMATE ACTION DATA AVAILABLE FOR ANALYSIS AND ACTION
 Economic Opportunity Equity
Climate change presents challenges for
New Orleans that can only be overcome by
cooperation and common goals. In order to
provide more consistent and accurate updates
regarding climate action in New Orleans, the
City will establish a climate action dashboard
on the City’s website by the end of 2023,
so progress can be tracked annually and
information about climate action will
be centralized.
11
ENERGY
More than half (51%) of the greenhouse gas emissions in New Orleans are derived from how we
produce, distribute, and use energy. The City is uniquely well-positioned to address these emissions
because the City Council regulates Entergy New Orleans (ENO) and can align the utility’s goals
with those of the City. This situation is very different from many cities that do not have regulatory
jurisdiction over their energy use and must rely on state regulation, but some barriers still exist to
City action. Our three core strategies on energy are:
 CLEAN OUR GRID
 Equity Public Health
The 2017 Climate Action Plan called for the
City Council to establish a local clean energy
standard to reduce carbon pollution from
our energy supply over time. In 2019, the City
Council established a rulemaking process to
develop this standard for a clean electricity grid.
The Renewable and Clean Portfolio Standard
(RCPS) passed by the Council is a mandate that
the electricity grid go net-zero by 2040 (90%
clean power) and 100% clean power by 2050. It
was determined in stakeholder negotiations that
this could not occur by 2030 as the 2017 climate
plan had called for, but could be put in place
by 2040. At the conclusion of the rulemaking
in 2021, the Council issued a resolution that
included rules for the RCPS. The rules define the
sources of clean energy as including renewables,
zero carbon emissions resources such as
nuclear, energy efficiency, and other qualified
measures. In addition, the Council has opened
another regulatory docket to require the City
to purchase 100% clean power for municipal
operations.
More recently, the Biden-Harris administration
has set an ambitious national goal — 100% clean
electricity by 2035. This plan adopts the more
accelerated 2035 goal as this action drives the
biggest segment of carbon pollution reduction
for the City over the next thirteen years and is
critical to the City’s ability to meet its carbon
reduction goals. The Office of Management
and Budget estimates that the newly signed
Inflation Reduction Act’s investments in clean
energy put the nation on track for a 40%
reduction in overall emissions by 2030. With
additional national regulatory actions and local
clean energy plans, the City is poised to meet
this accelerated goal.
12
 GENERATE MORE CLEAN ENERGY LOCALLY
 Economic Opportunity
New Orleans has a great deal of residential
rooftop solar, with photovoltaic panels on
approximately 9,000 properties around the City.
The 2017 Climate Action Plan established a goal
for 255 MW of solar by 2030, based on the
idea of harnessing just 20% of the City’s rooftop
solar capacity. Since that goal was established,
the City Council has worked with Entergy
New Orleans (ENO) to establish solar goals
for the utility’s portfolio, approving 20 MW of
ground-mounted solar installed at the NASA
Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans
East, and agreements to purchase energy from
two projects totaling 70 MW in surrounding
parishes, as well as 5 MW of rooftop solar in
city limits.
In 2020, the City launched Solar for All NOLA
with local installers Posigen and Solar
Alternatives to encourage homeowners and
businesses to get solar assessments and add
more solar rooftops to our region. The program
has facilitated 75 new solar installations
since 2020, with a cumulative capacity of
approximately 610 kW, with current customers
saving hundreds of dollars on their energy costs
annually. The City continues discussing ways
to ramp up this program with local companies
in light of the enhanced solar tax credits for
businesses and non-profits under the Inflation
Reduction Act and is setting a goal for 1,400
installations and 10MW capacity in both
residential and commercial installations
by 2030.
In 2019, the New Orleans City Council issued a
resolution finalizing the rules for a community
solar program, making solar accessible to
renters and others who may not have a suitable
rooftop of their own. This program provides
the opportunity for people to subscribe to
solar projects up to the amount of energy they
currently buy from Entergy and get credited on
their bill. As of October 2022, there is an open
docket to revise some of these community solar
rules to make projects more feasible and the City
is eager to finalize that so some of its planned
solar projects can participate. With a very
specific allocation reserved and preferred rates
for low-income customers, this program supports
the call by the Climate Action Equity Working
Group to help residents to reduce the cost of
electric bills while also providing them access to
renewable energy.
The City is supporting the local solar economy
by continuing to stay current on best practices
with permitting and is working to improve its
process. The City has also evaluated much of its
property for solar potential and has identified
eight buildings on which it plans to install
solar by 2024. In addition, the Environmental
Protection Agency has conducted a feasibility
study for a 6.4MW solar farm at the former
Agriculture Street landfill, which the City plans
to install by 2025.
Besides solar, offshore wind energy is emerging
as another important local power source. In
September 2022, ENO, along with Entergy
Louisiana, announced they had entered into a
Memorandum of Understanding with Diamond
Offshore Wind regarding the evaluation and
potential early development of wind power
generation in the Gulf of Mexico. The agreement
could lay the groundwork for another source
of clean power while also strengthening the
region’s economic development, particularly
with the establishment of the Louisiana Wind
Energy Hub at UNO.
 USE LESS ENERGY IN OUR BUILDINGS
 Equity Environment Economic Opportunity
Residents and businesses can also reduce their
emissions and save money by improving their
building’s energy efficiency. The New Orleans
City Council established the EnergySmart
program in 2010, directing ENO to provide
incentives for residents and businesses to save
energy and money on their utility bills. Examples
of this include LED lighting replacements,
HVAC upgrades and the installation of building
automation control systems to relax HVAC
settings during unoccupied hours. Since 2011,
EnergySmart has distributed more than
$39 million in incentives to almost 100,000
customers saving 325 million kilowatt-hours
and about 230 thousand metric tons of CO2e.
In 2015, the Council set a goal for the program
to ramp up its annual savings to equal 2% of
electricity sold by ENO each year, and the 2017
Since 2010, EnergySmart has distributed more than
$39 million in incentives to almost
100,000 customers, saving 214 million kilowatt-hours
and about 230 million metric tons of CO2e.
Climate Action Plan encouraged Council to take
that goal even further over time to seek savings
of more than 3% annually. In 2022, the Council
opened a rulemaking to consider a savings goal
to take effect once the 2% goal is achieved. ENO
files semi-annual reports with Council about the
progress of EnergySmart.
Some of the most energy-consuming structures
in New Orleans are large commercial buildings.
In 2018, the City launched a Downtown Energy
Challenge with the Downtown Development
District to encourage large buildings to track
their energy use, known as “benchmarking,” and
take steps to reduce it. Related to this, the City
Council established rules for ENO to disclose
building energy use to owners and tenants.
By 2024, the City will work with the City
Council to approve a benchmarking ordinance
for commercial and multi-family building
energy use and set building performance
standards for those same buildings.
Our 2017 Climate Action Plan included a
goal for City buildings to reduce energy use
by 15% by 2020. The City’s Department of
Property Management achieved that goal with
a comprehensive energy efficiency initiative
started in 2018. Between 2018 and 2021, the
City decreased overall energy use in buildings
by 23%. The City Council also recently passed
an ordinance requiring that certain new or
substantially renovated City facilities be built
to LEED Gold standards. LEED (Leadership
in Energy and Environmental Design) is a
widely used green building rating system
which provides a framework for healthy,
efficient green buildings. LEED certification is
a globally recognized symbol of sustainability
achievement and leadership. This mandate,
coupled with good energy management, will
ensure the City continues to be an energy
efficiency leader. To build on our progress,
the City is setting a new goal to achieve an
additional 17% reduction (40% cumulative)
in energy use in City buildings by 2030. In
addition, one of the largest energy users in New
Orleans is the SWB, who estimates that they
will reduce plant emissions by approximately
36,650 metric tons per year by purchasing
utility power from ENO in lieu of self-generation
via diesel turbines.
While the City is making good headway in
reducing use of electricity, use of natural gas in
our buildings is responsible for 33% of energyrelated and 17% of total GHG emissions in our
2017 inventory. In March 2020, the Louisiana
state legislature passed SB 492 that prohibits
any parish or municipality from restricting use
of natural gas to support its climate goals or any
other reason. Due to this restriction, the City
cannot take any regulatory action to reduce
use of natural gas and its related emissions.
This type of state legislation to reduce cities’
regulatory abilities is an increasingly popular
tactic supported by the natural gas industry
and these types of laws are now in effect in
eight states. However, the City can still lead by
example by electrifying its own buildings and
encourage others to follow suit by sharing the
economic and health benefits to ending fossil
fuel use in buildings. 
14
Resilience Spotlight: Greenlight New Orleans
Since its founding in 2006, Greenlight New
Orleans has led efforts to reduce carbon
emissions in our city. Starting by replacing old
incandescent light bulbs with more efficient
CFL and LED light bulbs, Greenlight has grown
its operation to include other sustainability
initiatives such as backyard vegetable gardens
and rain barrels. “We tend to disconnect these
things,” explained Greenlight founder Andreas
Hoffmann, “but eventually everything comes to
point to climate change, and CO2 reductions,
and becoming carbon neutral.”
Greenlight has offset more than 272 million
pounds of CO2 emissions through installation of
energy efficient light bulbs, which also resulted
in $28M in energy cost savings. Greenlight’s
healthy food initiative has built over 600
community gardens, increasing access to fresh,
locally-sourced produce for more than 1,200
individuals. Greenlight’s most recent initiative,
focused on capturing stormwater through rain
gardens and over one thousand rain barrels, has
retained a total of over 2 million gallons of water
since implementation. Retaining stormwater
can reduce the energy used by drainage pumps,
which helps decrease CO2 emissions in the city.
Greenlight’s work to reduce CO2 emissions has
not stopped despite the challenges presented
by COVID-19. In fact, New Orleanians began
participating in their program in greater
numbers during the pandemic, due in part to
safety measures taken by Greenlight. ”We set
it up in an extremely safe way. So now we have
a lot of volunteers, and they’re all local.” As
the number of volunteers increased, so too did
requests for rain barrel installations. “I think it
created something that was helpful for people’s
mental health. Maybe that’s a switch that
happened during COVID, you become a little
more aware of what’s here, what’s in front of
your door.”
Greenlight New Orleans has offset more than
272 million pounds of CO2 emissions through
installation of energy efficient light bulbs, which also
resulted in $28M in energy cost savings.
14
15
Resilience Spotlight:
The Alliance for Affordable Energy
The Alliance for Affordable Energy (AAE) is a
consumer and environmental advocate that is
focused on the power sector in Louisiana. “We
don’t think of affordability as just the bill that
folks receive at the end of the month. We think
of affordability in terms of the whole person,”
explains Logan Burke, Executive Director of
the Alliance. “AAE advocates for affordable,
equitable, and environmentally responsible
energy, from the way energy is produced to
the rates paid by consumers. What does it cost
to have a dirty energy system, what does it
cost Louisiana to be contributing so heavily to
climate change? On the other side, what are
the benefits of investing in energy efficiency to
our health, to our safety?”
Since its founding in 1985, AAE has successfully
led countless initiatives on behalf of Louisiana
residents, such as fighting for New Orleans
City Council to have regulatory authority over
public utilities in the city. Currently, AAE is part
of a collaborative of organizations called the
Energy Future New Orleans Coalition, which
worked for the adoption of the Renewable and
Clean Portfolio Standard (RCPS) approved by
the City Council in 2021. The RCPS requires
utility companies to generate an increasing
percentage of their energy from renewable
and clean resources, until ultimately reaching
net zero carbon emissions by 2040 and zero
carbon emissions by 2050. AAE has also been
instrumental in advocating for the Community
Solar program, working alongside the Climate
Action Equity Project and the Deep South
Center for Environmental Justice to make solar
accessible for all New Orleanians.
By thinking systemically about the kinds of
energy solutions that can not only reduce
emissions, but can also make us more resilient
to climate change, AAE continues to change
the relationship Louisianans have with energy.
“We do this work because we know that we
in Louisiana have a lot of challenges, and we
also have everything to fight for. This place is
really special, and the people here are worth
defending in every way we can.” said Burke. 
By thinking systemically about the kinds of energy solutions
that can not only reduce emissions, but can
also make us more resilient to climate change,
AAE continues to change the relationship
Louisianans have with energy.
15
16
TRANSPORTATION
Combustion of petroleum gas and diesel in cars, trucks, and buses on our roads accounts for
nearly 43% of the City’s total GHG emissions. Famously, the City once had a large network
of streetcars and, as one of the first American cities to use electric trolleys, New Orleans has
historically embraced innovative public transportation. As we consider how to reduce our
transportation emissions, we celebrate those roots with a new era of reimagining the way New
Orleanians move with two core strategies:
 DIVERSIFY OUR TRAVEL CHOICES TO INCREASE NON-AUTO TRIPS
 Equity Public Health Economic Opportunity
New Orleans is a city that has historically
embraced public transportation and walkable
communities, which is still seen today in the
layout of the City. We can make better use of
bicycling, walking, and public transportation
to increase the number of non-single occupant
vehicle (SOV) trips, which creates traffic and
pollution.
The 2017 Climate Action Plan set a goal of
50% non-automobile trips by 2030. We keep
that goal in this update and we are aiming
to make improvements to our infrastructure
and public transit to encourage this mode
shift. According to travel activity data from
the Google Environmental Insights Explorer,
automobile trips were about 68% of all trips in
2018 and walking was about 27%, with transit
and bicycling together contributing about 5%.
We will be looking at this data closely as we
work to encourage more trips through walking,
bicycling, and transit to meet our 2030 goal.
We have started with a commitment to
increasing bicycling with the development and
planned extension of the Lafitte Greenway, the
Mississippi River Trail, progress on installing 75
miles of low-stress bikeways by 2025 through
Moving New Orleans Bikes, and the rebirth of
a bike share program with 600 new electricpedal-assist bikes in partnership with a local
nonprofit Blue Krewe in 2021. Working in
partnership with Blue Krewe, the City is setting
a goal to expand the bike share fleet to 2,000
by 2025. To assist the 20% of New Orleanians
who do not have access to a car, the bike share
program offers reduced fares to qualifying lower
income residents. Walking and bicycling are
both aided by our Complete Streets initiative
that prioritizes street design that benefits all
users with a focus on people walking, bicycling,
and riding transit.
We have also made strides in transit in the last
few years. In December 2018, the Regional
Transit Authority (RTA) Board of Commissioners
unanimously adopted the Strategic Mobility Plan,
setting an ambitious agenda for transit in New
Orleans. RTA is in the process of updating this
plan to include a Bus Rapid Transit system and
several actions to significantly increase transitpriority infrastructure on City streets, including at
least six miles of dedicated transit lanes on City
streets by 2027 to improve transit times along
key corridors. Faster and more reliable services
is proven to increase ridership and support
mode shift. In March 2021, the Regional Planning
Commission (RPC) and RTA released New
Links, a comprehensive network redesign of our
regional public transportation system to better
serve riders and make riding transit more useful
and attractive. Implementation of the New Links
system redesign launched in September 2022.
To complement these route changes, the City
is starting work on developing Transit Oriented
Communities, walkable neighborhoods with
equitable housing options that will be connected
to effective and convenient transit options.
Improvements in transit and more options
for walking and cycling support equity and
economic opportunity in New Orleans, making
jobs more accessible to people without a car.
In its Strategic Mobility Plan, RTA set a goal for
making 65% of jobs in Orleans and Jefferson
parishes reachable within 60 minutes by transit
during peak periods by 2027. Continued work
by RTA and the City will continue to respond
to the CAEWG recommendation to improve
public transport in underserved communities for
faster and more reliable service. One CAEWG
recommendation where RTA and the City will
collaborate is around the improvement of bus
shelters, including adding roofing, lighting, and
other amenities.
The City recognizes that to achieve this plan’s
mode share goals, street infrastructure must be
safe and accessible for people so they can choose
to walk, bicycle, ride transit or drive based on the
needs of a particular trip. Since 2003, the City has
been actively tracking accessibility improvements.
17
The Department of Public Works has recently
launched an American with Disabilities Act
(ADA) dashboard that monitors the quality
and quantity of curb ramps and pedestrian
signals in the City. The Health Department
is also working to promote transportation
mode shifts through their chronic disease and
transportation safety programming.
 INCREASE SHARE OF ZEROEMISSIONS VEHICLES ON
OUR ROADS
Economic Opportunity Public Health
The automobile industry has gotten serious
about cleaner cars, with electric vehicle
(EV) sales accounting for 5.6% of the total
auto market in Q2 of 2022, up from 2.7% at
the same point in 2021, and automakers such
as General Motors, Volvo and Audi among
others who have recently announced they will
make only electric vehicles from 2035 onward,
at the latest. In its Electric Vehicle Outlook
2020 report, Bloomberg New Energy Finance
predicts that electric cars will be nearly 30%
of global passenger vehicle sales by 2030 and
nearly 60% by 2040. New incentives from the
Inflation Reduction Act, including tax credits
for purchases of domestically produced electric
vehicles, could make sales exceed those figures.
The rate at which people replace cars varies
around the world and estimates vary widely
about the potential number of electric cars on
the U.S. roads by 2035 from 13% to well over half.
Considering the renewed interest from the
federal government in supporting the transition
to electrified transportation, along with the
associated benefits electric vehicles can provide,
ranging from cleaner air to electric grid support,
the City is setting a goal of 40% of passenger
and light-duty vehicles being electric by 2035,
so it is important that the infrastructure for these
vehicles is accessible and equitable. That’s why
the City and ENO have partnered to install 31
free EV charging stations at 25 publicly chosen
sites throughout the city. Additionally, RTA
committed to a goal of 75% low or no emissions
vehicles in its fleet by 2030 in its Strategic Mobility
Plan, and is working closely with ENO to evaluate
electric grid impacts and potential charging
locations for their fleet electrification plans.
The 2021 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act provides historic public investments in EV
chargers through the National Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure (NEVI) program to install DC
fast chargers within one mile of designated
transportation corridors. DC fast chargers are
significantly faster than regular AC charging
stations, taking between 15 to 45 minutes to
charge most passenger electric vehicles up
to 80 percent—making it quick and easy to
charge during a trip. New programs from the
Environmental Protection Agency and the
Federal Transit Administration aimed at helping
local public transit organizations and public
schools transition their fleet to low and noemission vehicles could offer major financial
support towards clean fleet transition goals.
The City will work with RTA, the Orleans Parish
School Board, charter school systems and school
bus operators to access these funding streams.
The City will lead by example by transitioning its
own fleet of vehicles and developing a citywide
EV strategic plan to set a direction for all of
these electrification efforts. In 2022, the City
Council passed a law which prohibits the City
from purchasing fossil fuel powered vehicles
after 2025 as well as requiring a fleet transition
plan by November 2023. The City is setting
a goal of 75% of its fleet being low- or noemission vehicles by 2035. In addition, the City
will be installing EV charging stations at two City
facilities in 2023 as a pilot to inform the fleet
transition plan.
The combination of more transit-oriented
communities and increased transit ridership
with more electric buses and a clean local grid
together are the most impactful opportunities
for reducing the City’s transportation GHG
emissions long-term.
18
Resilience Spotlight:
Compost NOW
Compost NOW is a local community organization with a
mission: to empower local residents to take collective action
on the issue of food waste. Compost NOW meets the demand
for a free, easy, convenient, and reliable composting service for
New Orleanians. Since its founding in January 2017, Compost
NOW has diverted over 400,000 pounds of food waste from
landfills, thanks to local organizations and individuals putting
their food waste to good use.
Before COVID-19, Compost NOW was collecting nearly 4,000
pounds of food scraps every week, hosting free weekly dropoffs at eleven sites. Despite the immense obstacles presented by
the pandemic, Compost NOW continued to offer four drop-off
sites throughout the Spring, and created a “DIY” composting
program, distributing over 150 backyard compost bins.
Currently, Compost NOW operates 3–6 drop-off sites daily, on
both sides of the river. Lynne Serpe, founder of Compost NOW,
said “thanks to thousands of New Orleanians, we are so pleased
to have been able to keep going, and keep growing.”
Composted material can be used to organically enrich soil,
feed farm animals, and more. Additionally, compost-enriched
soil has better water retention qualities, making it a valuable
asset in efforts to slow & store stormwater to reduce flooding.
By diverting food waste from landfills, composting helps
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by preventing the release of
methane, a greenhouse gas released by rotting food, as well as
by reducing the distance the waste is transported.
Food waste, when properly handled, is a valuable, versatile
resource. Compost NOW continues to do critical work to keep
local resources local, for the benefit of New Orleanians and
our environment.
WASTE
Organic waste in our trash and sewage is the source of about 6% of the community-wide GHG
emissions. Reducing these emissions substantially will require a significant investment of resources
in the City’s waste and wastewater management infrastructure and potentially a substantial
overhaul in how waste is managed in the city to make these investments cost effective.
While waste is a small portion of the City’s overall emissions, the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law, or IIJA, includes some transformative funding opportunities for the construction of local
waste facilities needed to improve the City’s recycling diversion rates. Additionally, the SWB is
taking their emissions into account as they undertake a master planning process to pursue the
replacement of the City’s Eastbank wastewater treatment plant, which was heavily damaged
during Hurricane Ida. In developing the 2017 Climate Action Plan, the City learned that the landfill
in Jefferson Parish that receives the City’s trash, River Birch, has a comprehensive methane capture
system and creates about 20,000 gallons of biogenic renewable fuel daily. It sells credits for this
fuel into the California renewable fuel market and injects the biogenic gas into the local fuel supply.
In order to tackle these emissions more directly in the future, the City must analyze its waste and
recycling approach compared to other cities and related barriers and opportunities. This will be
the focus of near-term action.
18
19
Resilience Spotlight:
Glass Half Full
Glass Half Full is a local L3C which diverts used glass
products from landfills and converts them into sand and
cullet. These products are then used for disaster relief
efforts, creating new glass products, and more. “We
really want to be able to make recycling as a whole much
more accessible to New Orleans residents and to be
able to collect and divert as much glass as possible from
landfills,” said co-founder Franziska Trautmann.
With overwhelming support and encouragement from
New Orleans residents, Glass Half Full has diverted over
800,000 pounds of glass from landfills since 2020, their
first year of operation. Glass Half Full’s approach has
been focused on the collective efforts of individuals,
both in glass collection and fundraising. Glass Half Full
currently offers a pickup service to residents, as well as
a drop off location operating on Mondays, Wednesdays,
and Saturdays. “We love having the drop off at our place,
because we get to meet all these people, all the recyclers,
all the donors.” Glass Half Full has also recently expanded
their operation to include commercial pickup at local bars.
The possible uses for recycled glass are virtually limitless, ranging from eco-construction to coastal
restoration, as well as supporting New Orleans’ local artists and unique culture. “NOLA Alchemy” is
the collaboration between Glass Half Full and Liquid Art Glass, which uses recycled glass to create
colorful jewelry. “We’re starting in New Orleans, because that’s where we live, that’s where our
heart is,” explained Franziska, “I think expansion is definitely in our future, for the rest of Louisiana.
There shouldn’t be any barriers to recycling.”
 IMPROVE RECYCLING RATES THROUGH EDUCATION
AND INFRASTRUCTURE
 Economic Opportunity Public Health
Global recycling markets were shaken up over
the last few years with China’s changes in
policies on what materials it would accept, and
COVID-19 reduced or ended recycling and food
waste programs in several cities temporarily or
permanently. The waste management sector is
evolving rapidly in response to these effects,
and also to new interest at the national level
in extended producer responsibility and other
efforts to manage and reduce waste more
effectively in the U.S. New Orleans worked
diligently to revive its recycling programs after
Hurricane Katrina and the overall structure
of how the City manages waste has not been
substantially changed since then.
The City charges a flat rate for residential
and small business waste curbside collection
(<4 units) and requires its waste contractors to
also pick up recycling also for those that put out
a recycling cart, which is available via request
through an opt-in process. The contractors
assume ownership and are responsible for
all processing fees, taking advantage of any
upside or potential earnings that may be
available in the recycling market. The City does
not engage in the waste management market
for commercial businesses or larger buildings
and does not currently require recycling or
composting for restaurants or other businesses,
but this is something the City is eager to study
in the near future. However, these factors
contribute to the City’s current low diversion
rate, which typically is below 5% when recycling
is available citywide.
Hurricane Ida dealt the City’s sanitation services
a severe blow, with the City’s contractors failing
20
to provide trash pickups in the wake of the
storm. Long-standing resource issues were
further exacerbated, causing the suspension of
the City’s recycling program for half the City for
over a year. However, new curbside collection
contracts brought recycling back city-wide in
November 2022. With changes in the overall
market making recycling more attractive
recently, now is an opportune time for the
City to review its current processes, costs and
benefits in comparison to best practices in other
places and determine if other approaches might
better enable the City to increase recycling and
reduce waste and waste-related emissions. Over
the next two years, the City will commission
a solid waste master plan to evaluate waste
management opportunities. One area the City
is working on is to pursue an EPA grant through
IIJA to pursue universal recycling carts for all
residents as well as the construction of a new
Materials Recovery Facility (MRF) located in the
New Orleans area to expand the region’s limited
recycling processing capacity. The City was also
recently awarded a grant through the Recycling
Partnership to provide educational materials
and additional recycling carts as a part of the
rebirth of the City’s recycling program. The City
looks to build on these efforts and is setting a
new goal of increasing our recycling diversion
rates to 25% by 2030.
Waste management may provide a major
opportunity for New Orleans to create value and
economic activity that is currently not being
captured. The City could divert more waste
from the landfill and possibly develop markets
for recyclable goods and local opportunities for
businesses focused on the circular economy.
Several local businesses are already addressing
key areas of opportunity—from glass recycling
to composting.  
ADAPTATION & NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
The City has identified a number of climate change-related hazards in the 2020 Hazard Mitigation
Plan, including regional sea level rise, storm surge, coastal land loss, flooding, extreme heat and
cold, and increased tropical cyclones. These echo similar previous discussions of climate hazards as
outlined in the 2015 resilience strategy and 2017 Climate Action Plan and assess their current status
and the need for actions that help the City to adapt infrastructure and processes to the changing
climate. We have identified two areas of strategic focus for adaptation and nature-based solutions:
 BUILD ADDITIONAL GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
 Economic Opportunity Equity Public Health
Traditionally, the City has used “gray
infrastructure”—systems of gutters, pipes,
and pumps—to move stormwater out of the
city. Green infrastructure systems naturally
hold and retain stormwater. Examples include
rain barrels, a row of trees along the neutral
ground, or replacing impermeable surfaces
with greenspace or permeable materials.
These strategies not only aid climate change
adaptation, but also can contribute to GHG
21
emissions reductions. Trees consume carbon
dioxide, so increasing the number of healthy,
long-living trees in the city can help reduce our
net GHG emissions. Green infrastructure reduces
storm runoff by retaining water, reducing the
amount that must be pumped out of the city
and decreasing related energy use.
Since the Dutch Dialogues and development
of the Greater New Orleans Water Plan started
in 2010, various practitioners in the city have
focused attention on “living with water,”
and utilizing green infrastructure to improve
the City’s resilience. Development of the
Gentilly Resilience District, a $141M HUD grant
comprised of 7 projects and 3 programs that
are primarily green-infrastructure focused,
builds upon this work. So does the SWB’s
$2.5M in ratepayer-funded green infrastructure
projects and support for community-based
green infrastructure organizations like WaterWise
Gulf South and Urban Conservancy’s Front Yard
Initiative. Coordinated citywide efforts continue
to explore how green infrastructure can reduce
flooding risk in the city over time, such as the
October 2020 report commissioned by the
Greater New Orleans Foundation, Stormwater
Opportunities: Spirit of Charity, Lafitte Greenway,
Armstrong Park. Since 2018, the City has
completed or begun implementation on six
green infrastructure projects that will divert
approximately 11.8M gallons of water from
the City’s stormwater system. To expand
these efforts, including in parts of the areas
envisioned in this report, the City is setting a
goal to complete at least 15 additional green
infrastructure projects by 2035 that will divert
an additional 80M gallons.
Trees are green infrastructure too, and our trees
work overtime in New Orleans—helping with
water retention, slowing subsidence, removing
carbon emissions, reducing heat islands,
providing shade and fresh air, as well as adding
natural beauty. The city lost more 9.6% of the tree
canopy coverage from 2005 to 2009, primarily
due to Hurricane Katrina. The 2017 Climate Action
Plan included a community tree survey and set
a community-wide goal to plant 40,000 trees
by 2030. In October 2019, the Department of
Parks and Parkways completed the tree survey on
public property and in November 2020, the City
Planning Commission released a tree preservation
study to inform potential new strategies and
regulations for the preservation and planting of
trees on both public and private property to help
the City meet the tree goals in the City’s master
plan. By December 2021, the City estimated it
had planted 12,519 trees since 2017 towards the
40,000 tree goal for forest restoration.
Additionally, the City is working with SOUL
(Sustaining Our Urban Landscape) to develop a
reforestation master plan, which will guide best
practices and investment in our urban reforestation
efforts. The plan calls for 10% canopy coverage
in 10 years in all neighborhoods to ensure
equity and this plan shares that goal.
In 2021, the City Council approved $4 million
in bond funding for Parks and Parkways for
tree plantings and greenspace improvements.
Tree plantings from this fund began in the Fall
of 2022 and will continue over the next three
years. In addition, the City Council allocated
an additional $250,000 to Parks & Parkways
in 2022 to fund tree-plantings by non-profit
planting partners as well.
 INCREASE RESILIENCE OF OUR ENERGY AND WATER INFRASTRUCTURE
 Equity Public Health Economic Opportunity
As extreme weather events become more
frequent, the need to strengthen our energy
and water infrastructure becomes increasingly
more essential. Hurricane Ida, which rendered
most of the City without power for over a
week and caused several heat-related deaths,
made clear the need to invest in grid resilience,
including microgrids, which are small networks
of electricity users with a local source of supply
that is often connected to the grid, but can also
operate independently. In 2022, the City was
awarded technical assistance as a part of the
Department of Energy’s Communities-LEAP
program to study potential microgrid locations,
building off a previous DOE study completed
in 2019. The City intends to pilot a microgrid
at one of the sites identified by this process
by 2025. In addition, the City has committed
funds to Together New Orleans’ Community
Lighthouse project, which will create 16 solar and
battery-powered resilience hubs at churches and
community centers across the City. Community
groups such as the Get Lit, Stay Lit initiative,
led by the Feed the Second Line group, are also
working to install solar and battery systems at
local restaurants to create additional resilience
hubs as well as reduce the amount of food waste
from extended outages and the City is actively
exploring ways to partner with this initiative to
increase its impact. Work continues with the
Resilience Spotlight: The Water Collaborative
The Water Collaborative is the regional umbrella
organization for urban water management &
urban water climate adaptation in southeast
Louisiana. “The work we do is systematic,”
explained Jessica Dandridge, Executive Director.
The Water Collaborative primarily focuses on
three areas: public education, water policy, and
ensuring that the water sector is more equitable
throughout Louisiana.
The work of the Water Collaborative found
a new urgency at the outset of COVID-19,
particularly the importance of ensuring
equitable access to water and advocating for a
shutoff moratorium in the face of the pandemic.
The Water Collaborative helped create a
coalition known as the People’s Water Project,
to ensure affordable, equitable access to clean
water for people across the country.
Key to the success of the Water Collaborative’s
mission is changing the way society
discusses issues surrounding water and water
management. “Past trauma informs how
residents deal with water, how they respond
to water, and how politicians respond to them
responding to water,” explained Jessica. “We
are not having dynamic enough conversations
about why New Orleans is really flooding.”
The Water Collaborative is currently working on
various initiatives focused on securing funding
to update the aging water systems of southeast
Louisiana in order to address the cost and
quality of water. To make southeast Louisiana
more resilient to flooding, green infrastructure
installed in every home and business will help
to slow and store water before it overwhelms
drainage systems. These goals require increased
participation in the water management sector,
and the Water Collaborative seeks to do this
equitably. “We want the workforce to be diverse
and look like the communities that are impacted.
The communities that are most at risk for
flooding have the most underfunded, divested
infrastructure. All communities matter. No
community should be swept away or dismantled
because they’re more at risk for flooding.” To
support all of these goals and create a culture of
water awareness, the Water Collaborative also
advocates for comprehensive climate and water
education throughout Louisiana.
22
SWB and ENO to improve the capacity of
critical energy and water infrastructure through
the construction of the new Sullivan substation
that will serve transmission voltage electricity
to SWB’s Carrollton facility. When complete,
this substation is estimated to reduce SWB’s
emissions at the plant by one-third. As more
distributed energy generation and battery
storage is deployed in the city, it can reduce the
reliance on fossil-fuel-powered generators, as
well as support a more resilient grid. Since the
2017 Climate Action Plan, ENO has deployed
smart meters throughout the city enabling
the utility to have a better sense of where
and when energy is being used, and creating
the opportunity to innovate demand-side
management and smart grid upgrades. Beginning
in 2023, SWB will also install smart meters over
the next three years across the City, creating
similar opportunities around managing water
demand and the impact it has on energy use. President Biden and Mayor Cantrell touring a SWB facility in 2020
23
Strategies
Actions
Target/KPI
Lead (1st listed)
and Partners
Status 2022
Funding Source
Public Health
Equity/Social
Economic/Jobs
RAMP UP THE LOCAL CLIMATE ACTION ECONOMY
Divest the City’s investments in fossil
fuels and invest in clean energy and
climate solutions
Full
divestiture
by 2025
Existing;
selffunding
with
savings
Prioritize city investments in clean
energy and other climate solutions
whenever possible
ORS,
Dept. of Finance New ••
Present divestment and investment
policy recommendations to
NOMERS board
By end
of 2023 ORS New ••
Establish regional green bank with FNO $1B invested
by 2035
Varied
TBD
Green Mortgages FNO New •• ••• •••
Public Infrastructure Resilient
Finance Working Group
FNO, CNO,
NORA, SWB,
HANO, RTA,
OPSB, GNOF,
Aviation Board,
NOLABA
New ••
Promote sustainable business
practices and jobs
Sustainable
contracting
policy by
2024
JPMChase
$5M
and other
Promote local business
engagement in low-carbon, climate
action economy
NOLABA Underway •• •••
CAEG: Increase participation of
DBE in city projects
Mayor, City
Council Underway •••
CAEG: Increase opportunities in
environmentally sustainable sectors
for African-American residents
Mayor, City
Council Underway ••• •••
City Focus: Implement sustainable
contracting and procurement
policies and processes
New policy
by 2024 CAO, ORS New •• ••
Make climate action data available
for analysis and action
Dashboard
on website
by end
of 2023
General
fund/
existing
CITY FOCUS: Add climate action
data dashboard to city website and
track progress annually
ORS, ITI New
Key Climate Action Priorities Summary Chart
24
Strategies
Actions
Target/KPI
Lead (1st listed)
and Partners
Status 2022
Funding Source
Public Health
Equity/Social
Economic/Jobs
ENERGY — 51% OF GHG EMISSIONS
Clean our grid 100%
by 2035
Ratepayers
and
Federal
100% clean electricity by 2035
(national goal — local commitment
 by 2040)
City Council,
Federal
Government,
Entergy
Underway ••• •• ••
Generate more clean energy locally 255 MW
by 2035
Ratepayers
and
Federal
Increase local solar and regional
wind energy development
255 MW by
2035
Mayor's Office,
ORS Underway •• ••
Launch community solar 55 MW
by 2025
City Council,
ORS, Entergy New •• ••• ••
Increase Solar for All installations
1,400
installs
and 10 MW
by 2030
ORS, Posigen,
Solar Alternatives New •• ••• ••
CITY FOCUS: Install solar on
city property
Solar
on city
property
by end of
2024
ORS, Capital
Projects,
Property
Management
New ••
CAEG: Help residents to reduce the
cost of electric bills by generating
their own electricity
Mayor, City
Council Underway ••• ••
Use less energy in our buildings
2% annual
savings
by 2024 — 
3% by 2030
Ratepayers,
Federal
Grants,
Bonds
Benchmarking and building
performance standards ordinance
for multi-family and commercial
buildings
Ordinance
approval
by end of
2024
City Council,
ORS, Entergy Proposed •• ••
Increase annual energy savings for
Energy Smart 0.2% per year to
reach 2% annual savings goal set
in 2015
City Council,
Entergy Underway •• •• ••
Continue to increase energy savings
goal 0.2% beyond 2% to achieve 3%
or more annual savings
City Council,
Entergy Proposed •• •• ••
CITY FOCUS: Reduce energy use in
City buildings by an additional 17%
by 2030
Property
Management Underway •• ••
Key Climate Action Priorities Summary Chart
25
Strategies
Actions
Target/KPI
Lead (1st listed)
and Partners
Status 2022
Funding Source
Public Health
Equity/Social
Economic/Jobs
TRANSPORTATION — 43% OF GHG EMISSIONS
Diversify our travel choices to increase
non-auto trips
Non-auto:
50%
by 2030
Federal,
Grants,
Fares,
Existing
Implement "Complete Streets"
policy to design streets for all users
(walkers, cyclists, transit users,
drivers)
DPW,
City Council, ORS Underway •• ••
Develop robust Transit-Oriented
Communities (TOC) ORS, CPC, RTA In
development •• ••• ••
Invest in 6 miles of transit-only
infrastructure by 2027
RTA, DPW, City
Council, ORS Proposed •• ••
Redesign the regional public
transportation system to increase
access, capacity, and efficiency
September
2022 RTA, ORS Complete •• ••• •••
Increase transit ridership
20% of
trips by
2030
RTA, ORS Underway ••
Invest in safe, low-stress,
and comprehensive bicycle
infrastructure
75 miles
low-stress
bikeways
by 2025
DPW, ORS Underway •• ••
Expand bike share system 
2,000
e-bikes by
2025
ORS, BlueKrewe Underway •• •• •
CAEG: Improve public transport
in underserved communities for
faster and more reliable service
RTA, ORS Underway •• ••• ••
Zero emissions vehicles to reduce
air pollution
Existing
funds,
Grants,
Leases
75% of RTA’s fleet will be low or
no-emissions vehicles by 2030
(from Strategic Mobility Plan)
75% by
2030;
100%
by 2050
RTA, ORS,
Federal Transit
Administration
In
development ••• •
Increase ZEV use and facilitate
the development of electric vehicle
charging stations throughout
the city
40% EVs
by 2035;
100%
by 2050
ORS, DPW, CPC,
Entergy Underway •• • •
CITY FOCUS: Increase ZEV use in
City fleet
75% by
2035 CAO, ORS New • • ••
CAEG: Increase accessibility
of electric vehicles ORS Proposed • ••
CAEG: Place bike share locations
in underserved neighborhoods BlueKrewe, ORS Proposed •••
Key Climate Action Priorities Summary Chart
26
Strategies
Actions
Target/KPI
Lead (1st listed)
and Partners
Status 2022
Funding Source
Public Health
Equity/Social
Economic/Jobs
WASTE — 6% OF GHG EMISSIONS
Increase recycling rates through
infrastructure and education
25%
diversion
rate by
2030
CAO, Sanitation,
Advisory
Committee,
Economic
Development
Proposed
Commission a solid waste
master plan to evaluate waste
management opportunities
by 2024 Sanitation, ORS Proposed •• ••
Secure funding for universal
recycling and the construction of
a local MRF
Sanitation, ORS New Grants ••
CITY FOCUS: Increase recycling at
City facilities and reduce organic
waste where possible
CAO, Property
Management,
Sanitation, Parks
and Parkways
New •• ••
ADAPTATION AND NATURE
Increase green infrastructure and trees
throughout the city over time
Existing,
Grants
Complete at least 15 green
infrastructure projects by 2035 to
divert an additional 80M gallons
from stormwater system
DPW, SWB, ORS Underway •• •• ••
Conduct citywide tree survey and
canopy analysis
50% tree
canopy by
2030
Parks and
Parkways, SOUL,
NOLA Tree
project
Complete ••• ••
Plant 40,000 trees by 2030
40,000
new trees
citywide by
2030
Parks and
Parkways Underway ••• •• •
10% canopy coverage in all
neighborhoods
Parks and
Parkways New ••• ••• •
Increase resilience of our energy
and water infrastructure
Existing,
grants,
bonds
Conduct energy resilience study,
map community energy assets, and
develop recommendations
City Council, ORS In
development •• •• ••
Implement microgrid pilot(s) for
energy resilience ORS Underway •• •••
Make resilience improvements
to critical water and drainage
infrastructure
SWB, DPW Underway ••• ••• •••
CAEG: Establish equity framework
for energy decisions in order
to address the needs of all
New Orleanians
Mayor, City Council Proposed •••
Key Climate Action Priorities Summary Chart
27
Monitoring and Reporting
The City continues to work on our climate action priorities and will continue to update these
strategies as needed. With membership in C40, the City has committed to updating the
communitywide GHG inventory every two years and to always have an inventory that is no more
than three years old, so an update is due later this year. Additionally, we commit to updating the
climate action plan every five years or less.
Key performance indicators (KPIs) are the critical (key) indicators of progress toward an intended
result. Our KPIs include measurement of the target milestones in the action summary chart and
overall progress towards reductions. As one of the actions of this update, the City will add a
climate action dashboard to the City’s website to have a centralized, public place available for
interested stakeholders to check the City’s progress.
Actions Target KPI Frequency
Divest the City’s investments in
fossil fuels and invest in clean
energy and climate solutions
Full divestiture by 2025 % of city investments in
fossil fuels annual
Establish regional green bank
with FNO $1B invested by 2035 dollars in investments annual
Promote sustainable business
practices and jobs
Sustainable contracting
policy by 2024
a sustainable contracting policy
in place; % of sustainable goals annual
Make climate action data
available for analysis and action
Dashboard on website by
end of 2023
dashboard on website and
minimum annual updates annual
100% clean electricity by 2035 100% by 2035 power mix for energy generation
supplied to local grid annual
Increase local renewable energy
development 255 MW by 2035
KW installed by customer
type (utility-scale, residential,
commercial, industrial)
annual
Launch community solar 55 MW by 2025 # of subscribers/projects and
KW installed annual
City Focus: Install solar on city
property
Solar on city property
by end of 2024 KW of solar installed annual
Use less energy in our buildings 2% annual savings by 2024 EnergySmart annual performance annual
Diversify travel to increase nonauto trips
Reduce auto trips to <50%
by 2030 travel activity by mode share annual
Increase transit ridership to 20%
of trips by 2030
Make transit >20% of trips
by 2030
ridership data from RTA and
mode share annual
Invest in safe, low-stress bicycle
infrastructure
75 miles low-stress bikeways
by 2025 low-stress bikeways by mile annual
Expand bike share system 2,000 e-assist bikes by 2025 number of shared bikes in service annual
75% of RTA’s fleet will be low or
no-emissions by 2030
75% by 2030; 100%
by 2050 % of fleet low/no emissions annual
Invest in transit-priority
infrastructure
6 miles of transit-only
infrastructure by 2027
Number of transit-only lanes
in service annual
Complete 15 green infrastructure
projects by 2035
Divert 80M gallons from
stormwater system gallons diverted annual
City Focus: Increase ZEV use
in fleet
75% low/no emissions
by 2035 % of fleet low/no emissions annual
Citywide tree and canopy survey 50% tree canopy by 2030 % of tree canopy in city boundary 5 years
Plant 40,000 trees by 2030 40,000 new trees citywide number of trees planted annual
Implement microgrid pilot(s) for
energy resilience
A pilot microgrid in the City
by 2025 yes/no microgrid N/A
Increase recycling rates 25% diversion rate by 2030 % of waste sent to
recycling facilities N/A
28
BIBLIOGRAPHY
“Climate Action for a Resilient New Orleans.” City of New Orleans, Mayor’s Office of Resilience and
Sustainability, July 2017,
www.nola.gov/climate-action/
Cunningham, Alejandra Mejia, and Kimi Narita. “Gas Interests Threaten Local Authority.” NRDC, Natural
Resources Defense Council, 19 Jan. 2021,
www.nrdc.org/experts/alejandra-mejia/gas-interests-threaten-local-authority-6-states
“Divest / Invest.” C40 Cities, C40 Cities,
www.c40.org/divest-invest
Domonoske, Camila. “Better Late Than Never? Big Companies Scramble To Make Lofty Climate Promises.”
NPR, National Public Radio, 27 Feb. 2020,
www.npr.org/2020/02/27/806011419/better-late-than-never-big-companies-scramble-to-make-loftyclimate-promises
Drehobl, Ariel. “New Orleans Is on the Move.” ACEEE, American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy, 22 Dec.
2015,
www.aceee.org/blog/2015/12/new-orleans-move
“Economic Opportunity through Green Infrastructure: Equitable Access to Jobs and Contracts in GNO.” Issuu,
Greater New Orleans Foundation, 3 Jan. 2021,
issuu.com/greaterneworleansfoundation/docs/gnof20_green_final_digital-2020-12-23
“Energy Benchmarking.” Entergy, Entergy New Orleans, LLC,
www.entergy-neworleans.com/energybenchmarking/
“Energy Smart Filings.” Entergy, Entergy New Orleans, LLC,
www.entergy-neworleans.com/energy_efficiency/energy_smart_filings/
“Establishing a Docket and Opening a Rulemaking Proceeding to Establish Renewable Portfolio Standards.”
New Orleans City Council, City of New Orleans,
council.nola.gov/committees/utility-cable-telecommunications-and-technology/dockets/establishing-adocket-and-opening-a-rulemaking-pro/
“Gentilly Resilience District.” City of New Orleans: Resilience and Sustainability, City of New Orleans,
www.nola.gov/resilience-sustainability/areas-of-focus/green-infrastructure/national-disaster-resiliencecompetition/gentilly-resilience-district/
“Hazard Mitigation — City of New Orleans.” City of New Orleans: Hazard Mitigation, City of New Orleans,
nola.gov/hazard-mitigation/
“Living With Water: A New Vision for Delta Cities.” Living With Water, Waggonner and Ball,
livingwithwater.com/
“New Orleans City Council Community Solar Program.” Entergy, Entergy New Orleans, LLC,
www.entergy-neworleans.com/community-solar/
“New Orleans’ Energy Efficiency Program: EnergySmart.” Energy Smart NOLA, Entergy New Orleans, LLC,
14 Jan. 2021,
www.energysmartnola.info/
“Stormwater Opportunities: Spirit of Charity, Lafitte Greenway, Armstrong Park.” Issuu, Greater New Orleans
Foundation, 6 Oct. 2020,
issuu.com/greaterneworleansfoundation/docs/gnof_stormwater_report
“QuickFacts: Louisiana.” United States Census Bureau, United States Department of Commerce,
 www.census.gov/quickfacts/neworleanscitylouisiana
“QuickFacts: New Orleans, Louisiana.” United States Census Bureau, United States Department of Commerce,
www.census.gov/quickfacts/neworleanscitylouisiana
“QuickFacts: United States.” United States Census Bureau, United States Department of Commerce,
www.census.gov/quickfacts/neworleanscitylouisiana
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This update to the City of New Orleans’ Climate Action Strategy is the result of collaboration
between current and former City staffers, local and national environmental advocacy groups,
climate experts, and other advisors with the support and feedback from community and
government partners. We thank the many individuals who took time out of their busy schedules to
provide feedback and support for this plan.
Thank you to the New Orleans City Council, the Council Utility Regulatory Office, and City Council
staff members for their guidance and ongoing support of this initiative.
Very special thanks to the Greater New Orleans Foundation and the Deep South Center for
Environmental Justice for their support and partnership in convening the Climate Action Equity
Project, which produced the Taking Steps together on Equity and Climate Change report. This
report provided us with an important equity framework for this update. Additional thanks in this
effort to the Advisory Group for the Climate Action Equity Project, including Rev. Irvin Bell, Morris
Jeff High School and former director of the Abundance of Desire Wellness Center, Liz Davey,
Executive Director of Keep New Orleans Beautiful, Logan Burke, Executive Director of Alliance for
Affordable Energy, Jennifer Green, Vice President of the Gentilly Terrace and Gardens Improvement
Association, Vedisia Green of the Hollygrove Neighbors Association, Chuck Morse, Executive
Director of Thrive NOLA, Dawn Hebert, President of the East New Orleans Neighborhood Advisory
Commission, Rashida Ferdinand and Marlene Pete of Sankofa Community Development Corporation,
Yvonne Mitchell-Grubb of the Algiers Economic Development Foundation, Alex Posorske and
Courtney Jackson of RIDE New Orleans, Ella Delio and James Logan with the Greater New Orleans
Foundation, Natalie Manning, formerly the Community Engagement Manager for the Office of
Resilience and Sustainability, Dr. Beverly Wright and Monique Harden of the Deep South Center for
Environmental Justice, and Camille Pollan, former Energy Efficiency Program Manager for the Office
of Resilience and Sustainability.
Additional thanks to C40 for their research, guidance, technical assistance, and patience. Siobhan
Foley, Laura Jay, and Robert Stupka from C40 were integral to this update.
Many current and former municipal staff worked directly on this update or provided feedback and
support including Katie Donahue, David Morris, Liana Elliott, Dan Jatres, Laura Bryan, Zach Monroe,
Cheryn Robles, Meagan Williams, Tara Richard, Erin Spears, Andrew Tuozzolo, Greg Nichols, Jeff
Schwartz, Matt Torri, Brittany Mulla-McGovern, Michael Karam, Austin Feldbaum, Taylor Jackson,
Natesh Mohan, Sunae Villavaso, Tammie Jackson, Anna Nguyen, Marin Stephens, Jessie Evans, Jr.,
and Dr. Jennifer Avegno.
Individuals, agencies, organizations, and companies that were also supportive to the development
of this update include: Sewerage and Water Board of New Orleans, Regional Transit Authority,
Alliance for Affordable Energy, Finance New Orleans, New Orleans Business Alliance, Green Coast
Enterprises, Posigen, Sierra Club Delta Chapter, Blue Krewe, Ride New Orleans, LifeCity, Committee
for a Better New Orleans, Restore the Mississippi River Delta Coalition, Audubon Louisiana,
Deep South Center for Environmental Justice, The Water Collaborative, New Orleans Chamber
of Commerce, Sustain Our Urban Landscape (SOUL), NOLA Tree Project, Friends of the Lafitte
Greenway, Greenlight New Orleans, Tulane University Institute on Water Resources Law and Policy,
Greater New Orleans, Inc. and the Port of New Orleans. Thanks especially to Dwight Norton, Tyler
Antrup, Damon Burns, Alexis Kyman, Logan Atkinson Burke, Jackie Dadakis, Peter Waggoner,
Nellie Catzen, Rob Henig Bell, Monique Harden, Liz Shephard, Brent Newman, Jessica Dandridge,
Susannah Burley, Connie Udo, Mark Davis, Andreas Hoffman, Sophie Vorhoff, Dustin Robertson and
the RIDE New Orleans Policy Committee, Angelle Bradford, and Geoff Coats.
We also want to thank Charles Sutcliffe, Chief Resilience Officer for the State of Louisiana, for his
input and feedback on how this plan can work with the new Louisiana Climate Action Plan, as well
as Denise Chapoton for designing and editing this plan.
30
City of New Orleans
Office of Resilience & Sustainability
1300 Perdido St. 8E08
New Orleans, LA 70112