I greet you all who are here for a good cause.
Leaders who are working tirelessly to save our planet, I salute you.
Individuals like Leah Namugerwa are doing whatever it takes to see that life continues on planet, I salute you.
And those who are still denying and have not yet believed that the climate crisis is affecting us, we have stories to share.
I and many young people were robbed of our future.
We have been forced to grow, to act, to think like adults, because we cannot watch our future is shut, our dreams put to an end.
Our home (mother earth) burning, heating in drought and we do nothing.
When I was 14 years old, I saw landslides killing so many people, caused by harsh weather conditions.
Theses images have disturbed me and cannot allow me to rest until something thing is done about the changing climate.
Individually, everyone has a role to play to save the planet.
At such a tender age, I started a project called Birthday Trees when I was turning 15 years of age.
I plant trees on people's birthdays as one of the ways to fight climate change.
I have a goal of planting one million trees and more. What is your goal?
It is the rule of nature - living for others - because plants do not eat their own food, ,rivers do not drink their own water .
I don't believe it is justice to the young generation when our rivers and lakes are polluted.
I don't see justice when big polluters are untouchable.
Is it justice for the world leaders to choose profit over lives?
COP27 has been nick named the African COP.
If COP27 is to truly deliver, we must face some real truths.
Some truths that we have faced decades of inaction from world leaders
Some truths that the world is in a state of emergency because of fossil fuels.
Some truths that Africa contributes less than 4 percent of the carbon emissions but we suffer the most.
The future is at stake - mostly young children.
We are not sure whether we are heard when we speak or we are just ignored.
But let the African COP be a different COP .
Let the African COP listen to the biggest stake holders.
Let the African cop be an action COP.
Politicians, when you stand up to talk, my generation requests that you speak like there is an emergency.
Speak like you are not barren.
Act like you have a successor on earth because this is the only planet where we are going to carry on your legacy as your children.
Men in office how are you going to remembered?
Do you wish to be remembered as one who did a lot of nothing while in power?
Fellow delegates on the conservation front, the world is looking upon us to come up with an ambitious action plan that majorly benefits people.
A sustainable plan that predicts a bright future.
The time to force action is right now and right here at the African COP
I believe that we can do this TOGETHER.
Thank you.