Mr. President/Chairman, Distinguished delegates, let
me thank you for your astute leadership in guiding
our 27th Conference of Parties business and wish you
and your TEAM, success in our work and outcomes.
Let me also thank the Government and People of
Egypt, our gracious host for their preparations and
the hospitalities extended to me and my delegation. 
Each COP, Mr. President, Tuvalu is ever so
encouraged, by the good intentions and goodwill,
pronounced and announced through countries
beautifully crafted speeches made in this institution
as well as in other platforms the world over. But this
said, we must always gauge our efforts by what is
happening to our environment and to the people who
are affected in the front line, and one begs the
question whether we are delivering in our COP
objectives and outcomes!
As we reflect back to the transformative spirit of our
Agenda 2030, which is almost in its half way stage; we
recall in 2015 that the 2030 Agenda envisages a ‘world
of universal respect for human rights and human
dignity, the rule of law, justice, equality and
nondiscrimination; of respect for race, ethnicity and
cultural diversity; and of equal opportunity permitting
the full realization of human potential and contributing
to shared prosperity’.
That spirit is now waning as the scientific evidences
attest to a pathway of an increase in the global average
temperature to well above 2°C above preindustrial
levels. 
Mr President, Tuvalu is proactively seeking solutions
and not sitting on its laurels by any imagination. We
are developing a Long-Term Adaptation Plan (LTAP) – Te Lafiga; which is informed by science,
experience and best practice. Te Lafiga is an
ambitious plan envisaged to save Tuvalu to:
• accommodate our entire population safely beyond
worse case sea level rise beyond 2100.
• offer solutions to pre-existing development and
resource constraint issues that have remained
difficult to tackle for decades.
• offer hope for the future of Tuvalu and Tuvaluans.
We do join the call of COP 27, for enhanced
transparency of financial flows, facilitating access of
developing countries to predictable and adequate
climate finance, be it GCF or any other mechanism,
to mitigate and adapt to climate impacts, and
achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement. Tuvalu as
the Pacific regions champion for loss and damage,
urges an outcome of COP 27 that delivers a secure,
guaranteed Loss and Damaged Financing Facility,
especially considering the urgency caused by climate
change impacts, as reiterated by IPCC reports.
Mr President, existing gaps in the legal infrastructure
for dealing with climate change must also be
addressed. Tuvalu and Antigua and Barbuda have
established ‘COSIS’, a Commission of Small Islands
States on Climate Change and International Law to
seek advisory opinions from the International
Tribunal for the law of the sea, particularly on their
endeavors to clarify States international legal
obligations to combat climate change effects. As sea
level rises, our population will be displaced from their
homes; however, climate refugee is not covered under
the categories of the Refugee Convention.
Drowning islands and flooded nations requires a
reassertion of our basic human rights. Tuvalu and
the Marshall Islands have established a ‘Rising
Nation Initiative’, to commit the international
community to preserving our sovereignty and basic
human rights. These include inter alia the rights to
life, health, food and water, livelihood, culture,
privacy and home, life and property.
Mr. President we all know that the leading cause of
climate crisis is fossil fuels. Tuvalu have joined
Vanuatu and other Nations, calling for a Fossil Fuels
non-proliferation treaty, to steer our development models to peruse renewables and a just transition
away from fossil fuels.
Today’s climate emergency can be reduced to two
basic concepts: time and temperature. It’s getting too
hot, and there is barely time to slow and reverse the
increasing temperature. Therefore, it is essential to
prioritise fast-acting strategies that avoid the most
warming.
Based on time we have already reached 1.1C. By
Temperature, the planet is heating
disproportionately where most SIDS are. Short lived
pollutants deliver fast results. Scientific research
confirms that decarbonization alone does not slow
near term warming. CO2 must be paired with deep
cuts to the short-lived climate super pollutants:
methane, black carbon, hydrofluorocarbons, and
ground level ozone.
Mr President these are our resources in our L-TAP,
Te Lafiga, which is a home-grown strategy backed up
by science; one that is more durable and sustainable
in our view. We are willing to share to all likeminded
partners including ROC Taiwan whose meaningful
participation in the UN specialized agencies including WHO, ICAO and UNFCCC in the global fight
against climate change should be applauded and
recognized.
Mr. President if we do not make headway in this
COP; Tuvalu is quickly losing faith in this institution
to deliver a sustainable outcome that does not leave
island communities and many of us behind.
Nevertheless, I remain positively optimistic in our
institutions and global community to deliver; BUT
the IPCC reports are science based and their
narrative is clear and honest; and may I say, so also
the experiences and realities of my country’s plight.
Tuvalu and many islands are struggling to cope with
sea level rise that exacerbates many other
development challenges.
I thank you for this opportunity and wish COP 27 all
the success.
Tuvalu mo te Atua.