Greater
Boston
Priority
Climate
Action
Plan
March
2024

Greater Boston Priority Climate Action Plan
March 2024

PREPARED BY:
Metropolitan Area Planning Council
60 Temple Place, Boston, MA 02111
CPRG@mapc.org
617-933-0700
This project has been funded wholly or in part by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
under assistance agreement 00A01117 to Metropolitan Area Planning Council. The contents of this document
do not necessarily reflect the views and policies of the EPA, nor does the EPA endorse trade names or
recommend the use of commercial products mentioned in this document.
Banner image below photo credit: Quasi Akoud

Acknowledgements
MAPC Lead Authors
Sasha Shyduroff
Allie Shepard
Emma Zehner

Jeremy Koo
Francelis Morillo Suarez
Julie Curti

Thank you to additional MAPC staff that contributed to this plan.

Weston & Sampson
Cassidy Yates
Robin Seidel

Eliza Jobin-Davis
Adria Boynton

DREAM Collaborative
Rosa Herrero

Steering Committee

Merrimack Valley Regional Planning Commission, Nashua Regional Planning Commission, Northern Middlesex
Council of Governments, Old Colony Planning Council, Rockingham Planning Commission, and Southern New
Hampshire Planning Commission.

Justice40 Advisory Group

Action for Boston Community Development, Inc., Action, Inc., All In Energy, Asian Community Development
Corporation, Authentic Caribbean Foundation, Cambodian Mutual Assistance Association, Citizens Inn,
Conservation Law Foundation, Boston Climate Action Network, Emerald Cities Collaborative, Granite State
Organizing Project, Groundwork Somerville, Grow Nashua, Healthcare without Harm, Massachusetts Immigrant
and Refugee Advocacy Coalition, Merrimack River Watershed Council, Neighborhood of Affordable Housing,
Inc., New England United 4 Justice, Quincy Asian Resources, Roxbury Community College Foundation, The
Latino Support Network, Town Green, Transit Matters, and Voices of the Community, and one Indigenous Land
and Water Conservationist and Environmental Activist.

Municipal Advisory Group

Massachusetts: Acton, Arlington, Ashland, Boston, Bridgewater, Brockton, Cambridge, Chelsea, Concord,
Framingham, Gloucester, Hudson, Lexington, Lawrence, Lowell, Melrose, Methuen, Natick, Newburry, North
Andover, Norwood, Plymouth, Reading, Revere, Salem, Weston, Winchester.
New Hampshire: Derry, Nashua.
Thank you to additional municipal and community stakeholders, as well as members of the public who attended
listening sessions and provided input on the development of the plan.

7

Executive Summary
This Priority Climate Action Plan (PCAP) is the Greater Boston Region’s near-term plan to address the urgent
challenge of climate change. The changing climate is already impacting communities across the region, leading
to deadly high heat days in the summer, rising sea levels on the coasts, and increasingly frequent and severe
inland flooding events from extreme precipitation due to warmer air. Climate risks and impacts disproportionately
harm the region’s frontline communities – areas where residents have lower-incomes and where communities
of color are more likely to live.1 To counter these risks, we must rapidly reduce the greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions emitted and focus on strategies that ensure an equitable transition to a clean energy future that
prioritizes those most vulnerable to climate hazards. Action is needed at all levels to change our electricity
generation, buildings, transportation, and consumption and waste systems to be net zero, or free of GHG
emissions at a community scale. The PCAP highlights strategies that municipalities, in partnership with regional
planning organizations, state agencies, community-based organizations, and private sector can implement
to meaningfully mitigate GHG emissions and advance equity in the region. Combined with federal and state
policy and funding commitments, regional and local-level climate action can help us realize a safe, healthy, and
prosperous future for everyone.

Figure 1: Map of the Greater Boston Metropolitan Statistical Area and the
designated low-income and disadvantaged communities within the region.

8

The development of the PCAP was directed by the federal Inflation Reduction Act and funded by the
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Climate Pollution Reduction Grant (CPRG) Program. The
Metropolitan Area Planning Council (MAPC) led the region’s planning effort, in close coordination with
the six other Regional Planning Agencies/Commissions serving the region. The PCAP represents the first
regional priority plan of near-term climate action and will inform the development of the region’s more detailed
Comprehensive Climate Action Plan (CCAP), which will be complete by summer 2025.
The Greater Boston Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) included in this plan spans across 167 municipalities
and 4.7 million residents across Eastern Massachusetts and Southern New Hampshire. Fifty-nine
municipalities within the region encompass federally defined Low-Income and Disadvantaged Communities
(LIDAC) census tracts where residents experience disproportionate climate, environmental, health, and
economic burdens. The PCAP focuses on implementing climate mitigation solutions in LIDAC communities
to ensure the region’s most underserved populations are prioritized and benefit from programs and policies
designed to reduce climate pollution in the region.
This PCAP builds on existing climate action planning and implementation efforts from within the region, best
practices from peer jurisdictions, and detailed input and feedback from key stakeholders. During the planning
process, MAPC convened a Municipal Advisory Group and a Justice40 Advisory group to gather input from
municipal stakeholders and community-based groups across the region, with a focus on LIDAC communities.
Each group met three times over the six-month planning period to provide input and feedback on the plan.
Additionally, MAPC held three virtual listening sessions for the region for additional stakeholders and the public
to provide input.

Greenhouse Gas Inventory & Priority Measures:
During the planning process, MAPC developed a regional greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory to establish an
emissions baseline for the year 2017. This inventory utilized publicly available datasets at the state and municipal
level and is the first GHG inventory for the Greater Boston region. The resulting inventory shows that stationary

Figure 2: Percentage of GHG emissions by sector within the Greater Boston MSA in 2017.

9

uses, primarily buildings, make up the majority of emissions in the region at 41 percent, followed closely by
transportation at 34 percent. Electricity generation is at 19 percent and waste makes up five percent.
The PCAP includes eleven priority measures that will reduce GHG emissions in the near-term by 2030 across
the four highest polluting sectors in the region: Transportation, Buildings, Electricity Generation, and Waste.
Each measure in the plan includes a description of the context and action required, geographic scope, GHG
emissions reductions calculations, benefits to federally-designated LIDAC communities, implementing agencies
and their authority to implement, implementation timeline, metrics to track progress, availability of other funding
to implement the measure, workforce development opportunities, examples of success and ongoing work in
the region, and policy priorities to support the measure. These eleven measures are not inclusive of all Greater
Boston’s many climate priorities and instead represent a sub-set of measures that are implementation-ready,
will lead to substantial GHG emissions reductions by 2030, and will advance equity in the region. The priority
measures are summarized in the table below.

Looking Forward
Completing the PCAP is just the first phase of the Greater Boston Climate Action Plan process. Between March
2024 and August 2025, MAPC will continue to work with the Municipal and Justice40 Advisory Groups to
develop a regional Comprehensive Climate Action Plan (CCAP) that will establish emission reduction goals for
2030 and 2050. The CCAP will also include additional GHG reduction measures from the Industry, Agriculture,
and Working Lands sectors, as well as additional measures in Buildings, Transportation, Electricity Generation,
and Waste.
Taken together, the PCAP and the CCAP will provide a strong strategic framework for driving deep and
equity-forward GHG emissions reductions in the region. Regional and municipal leaders, community-based
organizations, and the States of Massachusetts and New Hampshire, have already focused on implementation,
and will use this plan and previous work to develop policies and programs needed to build a new climate future
for the region.
Table 1: Summary of Priority GHG Reduction Measures

Buildings
B1. Building
Decarbonization
Technical Assistance

Expand and improve technical assistance programs, decarbonization
planning resources, and outreach and education efforts.

B2. Building
Decarbonization
Financial Assistance

Expand funding for comprehensive building decarbonization,
particularly for affordable housing, renters/landlords, and small
businesses; explore creative funding and financing solutions and
opportunities to address the intersection of energy, health, and
housing.

B3. Net-Zero
Municipal Buildings

Develop and implement a plan to decarbonize new and existing
municipal buildings; establish technical assistance programs to
support municipal decarbonization planning and financing.

10

Buildings
B4. District Scale
Renewable Thermal
Energy Projects

Implement networked geothermal or water-based district heating
and cooling projects through municipal ownership and public-private
partnerships; support participation of low-moderate income customers.

Transportation
T1. Public Transit
Access and
Affordability

Expand public transit service, increase frequency and reliability of
transit services, implement fare free routes and passes, and make
stops and stations more accessible.

T2. Multi-Modal
Transportation

Expand multi-modal transportation networks by building, improving,
and expanding walking and cycling infrastructure that is safe, wellconnected, and accessible.

T3. Electric Vehicle
Affordability

Increase the affordability and accessibility of EVs through EV car share
programs, technical and financial assistance to purchase EVs, used EV
markets, group purchasing, and education.

T4. Electric Vehicle
Charging

Deploy public EV chargers near multifamily housing and commercial
centers, explore charging incentives, and educate potential EV users
about charging.

Electricity Generation
E1. Renewable
Energy Projects

Deploy community shared solar, energy storage, microgrid, and
other renewable energy projects; provide technical assistance and
support for communities to access incentives and financing to develop
renewable energy projects.

E2. Municipal
Aggregation

Adopt municipal aggregation programs, increase the percentage
of Class I RECs in program offerings, and implement low-moderate
income customer pricing tiers.

Waste
W1. Reduce Solid
Waste Going
to Landfills and
Incinerators

Establish regional composting sites; explore collective procurement of
solid waste disposal and recycling services; expand re-use programs.

1. MAPC’s Climate Vulnerability Mapping tool shows communities with the greatest exposure, sensitivity, and
adaptative capacity to climate change hazards: https://climate-vulnerability.mapc.org/.
11

Key Terms and Acronyms
Comprehensive Climate Action Plan (CCAP):
A report that provides an overview of the region’s significant GHG sources/sinks and sectors, establishes
near-term and long-term GHG emission reduction goals, and provides strategies and identifies measures that
address the highest priority sectors to help the grantees meet those goals.
Greenhouse gas (GHG) Inventory:
A list of emission sources and sinks, and the associated emissions quantified using standard methods.
Justice40 Initiative:
A commitment made by the Biden Administration to ensure 40% of benefits within certain federal investments
go towards historically underserved populations- including low-income communities that have been
overburdened by pollution and environmental harms.1 Municipalities containing designated underserved
populations are sometimes referred to as “Justice40 communities”.
Low Income Disadvantaged Communities (LIDACs):
Federal definition for communities with residents that have low incomes, limited access to resources, and
disproportionate exposure to environmental or climate burdens, including air quality, climate change, energy,
environmental hazards, health, housing, legacy pollution, transportation, water and wastewater, and workforce
development.
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA):
Federally designated region in the U.S. Census that is used to define specific metropolitan regions based on
populous urban center and shared economic and social ties.
Priority Climate Action Plan (PCAP):
A narrative report that includes a focused list of near-term, high-priority, and implementation-ready measures to
reduce GHG pollution and an analysis of GHG emissions reductions.
Regional Planning Agency (RPA) and Regional Planning Commission (RPC):
An organization that provides technical support for local governments within a specific geographic area, as well
as develops regional plans to guide land use, development, and policy for the region.

1. Justice40 Initiative | Environmental Justice | The White House
12

1. Introduction
1.1.  CPRG Overview
The Climate Pollution Reduction Grant Program (CPRG), authorized under the Inflation
Reduction Act and administered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), funds
state and regional governments to develop Climate Action Plans.1 The Metropolitan Area
Planning Council (MAPC) developed this Priority Climate Action Plan (PCAP) for the Greater
Boston-Cambridge-Newton, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).2 MAPC led this
planning process in close coordination with the six other Regional Planning Agencies (RPAs)
and Regional Planning Commissions (RPCs) that serve the 167 municipalities in the region.
Completing the PCAP is the first step of the planning process, which will continue through August
2025 and culminate with developing a Comprehensive Climate Action Plan (CCAP) for the
region. Together, the PCAP and CCAP comprise the first-ever Greater Boston Climate Action
Plan (GBCAP), which will be used to guide climate action at both the local and regional levels in
the near-term (2030) and the long-term (2050).

1.2.  About the Greater Boston Region
The Greater Boston region defined as part of this plan spans 167 communities across Eastern
Massachusetts and parts of Southern New Hampshire. The region is tied together by shared
industries, jobs, and transportation networks. For example, 82,000 residents commuted regularly
to Massachusetts from New Hampshire for work as of 2018.3
Greater Boston MSA by the Numbers:
Total population: 4.7 million residents4

Number of municipalities: 167 included in the PCAP planning area5

11th largest MSA in the United States6

Most populous cities within the region: Boston, Cambridge, Lowell, Brockton,
and Quincy7

Nashua is the second most populous city in New Hampshire8

Median Household Income: $104,2999

13

Figure 3: The Metropolitan Statistical Area includes 167 municipalities.

Of the almost two million housing units in the region, approximately 61 percent are owneroccupied and 53 percent of units are single family homes.10 The region has some of the country’s
highest rents for metro areas, and nine percent of residents live below the federal poverty line.11
Within the region, almost 45 percent of renters are housing cost burdened and over half of Black
and Latino renters are housing cost burdened.12 As of 2020, almost one quarter of households
had a high energy burden, defined as above six percent of household income, and twelve percent
had a severe energy burden, defined as over ten percent).13 Further, the median energy burden
of low-income households in the region is almost four times higher than that of non-low-income
households.14 The subsequent section of this plan provides a more in-depth review of equity
challenges and climate burdens in the region.
14

Within the region:

67%

67% of residents
identify as White

8.6%

8.6% identify as Asian

6.9%

6.9% identify as Black
or African American

.1%

0.1% identify as
American Indian and
Alaska Native

.02%

0.02% identify as
Native American and
other Pacific Islander

4.6%

4.6% identify with two
or more races

11.8%

11.8% of residents
identify as Hispanic or
Latino (of any race)

26.2%

Almost 26.2% of
residents speak a
language other than
English at home15.

19%
17%

About 19% of
residents are under the
age of 18 and 17% are
over the age of 6516.

Figure 4: Demographic Data
Source: Race and ethnicity data is from the 2020 U.S. Census.17 Age and language data is from the
2022 ACS 1-Year Survey.18 Note: The percentage of Native American community members is often
undercounted when not considering community members identifying with more than one race.19
15

The region is located on the ancestral and unceded lands of the Massachusett, Wampanoag,
Pennacook, and other Native peoples who have lived and continue to live in what is now known
as Eastern Massachusetts and Southern New Hampshire.20 These communities have rich oral
traditions that have preserved their histories and connections to the land.
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts recognizes the sovereignty and enduring presence of
two federally recognized tribes: the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe, who have inhabited parts of
Massachusetts and Eastern Rhode Island, and the Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head Aquinnah,
who have lived at Aquinnah and across what is now called Martha's Vineyard.21 Massachusetts
also recognizes the Hassanamisco Nipmuc Band as a state-recognized tribe.22
Additionally, there are tribal groups whose identities and cultural heritage persist independently
of federal or state recognition. For example, New Hampshire does not have state or federallyrecognized tribes but is home to indigenous communities such as the Abenaki, who have
historical ties to the region.23 The Native peoples of this region continue to contribute to its
cultural and historical landscape and are integral to the future development of the region.

Figure 5: Native American tribal territories in Southern New England in about 1600.
Source: Wikimedia Commons - File:Tribal Territories Southern New England.png Wikimedia Commons.

16

1.3.  Climate Progress to Date
Communities in Greater Boston are planning for and implementing climate mitigation and
adaptation projects, policies, and programs. Twenty-eight municipalities within the region
have either completed or are working on local climate or net zero action plans and others
are incorporating climate considerations into broader comprehensive planning efforts. Most
Massachusetts municipalities in the region have also received the state’s “Green Communities”
designation based on their efforts to plan for municipal energy reductions, fleet electrification,
and more.24 Municipalities in Greater Boston are increasingly embracing a regional planning
approach. For example, the Massachusetts cities of Chelsea, Revere, and Winthrop recently
collaborated on their net zero planning efforts: the North Suffolk Zero Carbon Action Plan outlines
a regional roadmap to reduce GHG emissions, improve public health, and address longstanding
equity concerns across sectors.25
Both Massachusetts and New Hampshire are actively participating in the CPRG planning effort at
the state level. Massachusetts also released its Clean Energy and Climate Plans for 2025/2030
and 2050 in 2022,26 and accompanying Decarbonization Roadmap analyses, to define how to
meet its statutory obligations to reduce GHG emissions.27

Local Examples of Climate Leadership and Innovation
Communities are also actively implementing GHG reduction measures, including adopting the
Massachusetts Stretch and Specialized Energy codes, accelerating renewable electricity usage
through municipal aggregation programs, expanding electric vehicle charging infrastructure.
Eight communities in the region are participating in a fossil-fuel free demonstration pilot, which
will require most new construction and major renovations to be fossil fuel-free for heating and
cooling.28 Municipalities are pursuing innovative programs and pilot projects such as:
With funding from the investor-owned utilities Eversource and National Grid,
Framingham and Lowell, Massachusetts, are piloting networked geothermal systems
that will aim to affordably heat and cool residential and commercial buildings.29
The City of Nashua, New Hampshire, recently enrolled 8,000 residents in the Nashua
Community Power Program, the first municipal aggregation program of its kind in New
Hampshire.30
The City of Boston adopted a Building Emissions Reduction and Disclosure Ordinance
for large buildings,31 is supporting clean energy workforce development through the
PowerCorpsBos32 and the Good Jobs Metro Boston Coalition,33 and is in the process of
electrifying its 750 school buses.34

Centering Equity and Environmental Justice in Climate
Action
As a result of long-term advocacy by community-based organizations and Environmental Justice
(EJ) advocates, as well as growing internal reflection on the role of local land use and policies
in shaping existing inequities, municipal governments are increasingly working to center equity
throughout climate planning processes. Some local governments are also seeking to improve
17

their community engagement through collaborative governance models that identify actions that
benefit EJ communities. For example, local governments in the MetroWest region of Greater
Boston have hired multilingual community liaisons from or with strong ties to EJ-designated
neighborhoods to lead conversations about climate risks, identify community solutions, and
develop resources, such as climate emergency preparedness materials like magnets and flyers.35
The approach taken in this plan recognizes that residents in Low-income and Disadvantaged
Communities (LIDAC) are most often impacted first and worst by climate change and climate
pollution. This plan also refers to Justice40, which is a commitment made by the Biden
Administration to ensure 40 percent of benefits within certain federal investments go towards
historically underserved populations. More information on LIDAC communities can be found in
the subsequent section of this plan.

1.4.  About the Priority Climate Action Plan
The PCAP identifies near-term, implementation ready, priority measures that will reduce
GHG emissions and advance equity priorities in Greater Boston. According to the regional
GHG inventory, the Buildings, Transportation, Energy Generation, and Waste sectors make
up 99.9 percent of emissions (see Section 3). The PCAP focuses on key strategies, defined
interchangeably in this plan as measures, to reduce emissions from these four sectors to address
most of the region’s emissions.

Buildings

Transportation

Electricity
Generation

Waste

18

Framingham Cochituate Rail Trail. Photo by Weston & Sampson

The PCAP includes:
An inventory of the region’s GHG emissions from the stationary energy, electricity,
transportation, waste, agriculture, and natural and working lands sectors in 2017.
Eleven priority GHG emissions reduction measures across the buildings,
transportation, energy generation, and waste sectors.
Each measure includes a brief description, geographic scope, GHG emissions
reductions calculations, co-benefits and LIDAC benefits,36 implementing agencies
and their authority to implement, implementation timeline and milestones, metrics
to track progress, availability of other funding to implement the measure, workforce
development opportunities (as applicable), examples of success and ongoing work in
the region, and federal, state, and local policy priorities to support the measure.
The PCAP draws on previous and ongoing climate work in the region and the expertise, best
practices in the field, and experience of municipal and regional leaders, community-based
organizations, and residents who have been working on climate and sustainability issues for
many years. Local and state climate action plans served as a starting point for the GHG reduction
measures considered for the PCAP. Several rounds of input from the plan’s RPA/RPC Steering
Committee, Municipal Advisory Group, Justice40Advisory Group, and public listening sessions
helped prioritize and refine the measures to have the greatest impact on GHG reductions and
equity.
19

Development of Priority GHG Reduction Measures
During the fall of 2023, MAPC compiled a database of existing climate action plans and net
zero action plans from within the region, which collectively include hundreds of actions that
municipalities can take to reduce GHG emissions. MAPC utilized this database to create an initial
list of 70 potential municipal and regional-level measures across the Buildings, Transportation,
and Energy Generation sectors. Additional input on measure development was collected
during a public listening session and from the Municipal Advisory Group. The project team then
evaluated measures on the list based on ability to implement within five years, magnitude of GHG
emissions reduction, and prominence of equity and co-benefits. Measures that did not meet
these criteria were removed from the list, resulting in 25 measures.
MAPC created a prioritization matrix to rank each of the 25 measures across a set of criteria
based on equity and co-benefits, input from the Advisory Groups, and the evaluation criteria from
the CPRG Implementation Grant Notice of Funding Opportunity shaped the remaining criteria.
The prioritization matrix included nine criteria and each measure was scored on a scale of 1-3 for
each of the nine criteria:
1.	 GHG Emissions Reductions by 2030
2.	 GHG Emissions Reductions by 2050
3.	 Reduces Harmful Pollutants
4.	 Ability to be Implemented within five years
5.	 Leads with Equity
6.	 Reduces Cost of Living
7.	 Reduces Environmental and Climate Burdens
8.	 Creates Economic and Job Benefits
9.	 Improves Community Resilience to Climate Impacts
The RPA/RPC Steering Committee then reviewed the scores to determine the top ten priority
measures to include in the PCAP. During this process some measures were combined or
integrated into other measures. Based on input from advocates, community members, and
municipal staff leaders, a priority measure from the waste sector was also developed, evaluated,
and included in the PCAP.

Lowell, Massachusetts. Photo by Weston & Sampson
20

Figure 6: GHG reduction measure generation and stakeholder engagement timeline

Stakeholder Engagement
Steering Committee and Advisory Groups
The measure development process was led by MAPC in partnership with the RPA/RPC
Steering Committee, the Municipal Advisory Group, and the Justice40 Advisory Group. The
RPA/RPC Steering Group met virtually four times and the Municipal and Justice40 Advisory
Groups each met virtually three times to provide input on initial measure development, share
feedback that shaped the criteria used for prioritization, and give greater depth and details to the
implementation and analysis of the priority measures. Feedback from advisory group meetings is
summarized in Appendix E.

21

Table 2: Summary of Steering Committee and Advisory Groups
Group

Role

Participants

Regional
Planning Agency/
Commission
(RPA/RPC)
Steering
Committee

Advise the development
of the plan, analyses,
and measure
development. Lead
engagement with
communities within
each RPA/RPC’s region.
Support outreach for
Advisory Groups.

Metropolitan Area Planning Council
(MAPC), Old Colony Planning Council
(OCPC), Merrimack Valley Planning
Commission (MVPC), Northern
Middlesex Council of Governments
(NMCOG), Rockingham Planning
Commission (RPC), Southern New
Hampshire Planning Commission
(SNHPC), and Nashua Regional
Planning Commission (NRPC).

Municipal
Advisory Group

To provide input
and feedback on the
development of priority
measures, co-benefits,
and implementation.

29 municipalities, including 11 LIDAC
communities, from across the MSA.37

Justice40
Advisory Group

To provide input
and feedback on the
development of priority
measures, co-benefits
and implementation.

25 non-profits, community-based
organizations, and individual advocates
from across the MSA.38

Justice40 Advisory Group
MAPC convened the Justice40 Advisory Group to gather feedback on the plan from service
providers, non-profits, and community-based organizations that represent residents in their
respective LIDAC community service areas. The Justice40 Advisory Group’s involvement in
the process helps to amplify the voices of those who have often been underrepresented and
ignored in planning processes, strategy development, and funding allocation. Recruitment for the
Justice40 Advisory Group was done through the public listening session, online methods such as
email and social media, and via existing relationships and networks. More than 50 organizations
and individuals submitted an expression of interest and were selected based on several key
factors including geographic/community representation, non-profit or community-based
organization status, and ability to participate. Many of the organizations received a participant
cost stipend to support their time.

22

Figure 7: Virtual whiteboard activity snapshot of a draft energy generation measure and feedback
from the Justice40 Advisory Group relating to the questions posed through the lens of equity.

Public Listening Sessions
MAPC hosted three virtual listening sessions open to all community members in the region.
MAPC conducted outreach to municipal contacts, community-based organizations, utility
representatives, and others, to share this opportunity to learn about the process and provide
feedback. During the November 2023 meeting, MAPC introduced the CPRG program, and
provided an overview of the PCAP and CCAP, and Advisory Group opportunities. Additionally,
participants shared their key challenges and priorities in the buildings, electricity, and
transportation sectors during breakout discussions (see Figure 8). Following the meeting, MAPC
incorporated these insights into the larger list of GHG reduction measures. Feedback from the
second and third listening sessions is summarized in Appendix E.
At the second and third virtual listening session, held in late January 2024 once during the day
and once during the evening, MAPC provided an update on the PCAP development process,
the draft priority measures, and presented initial GHG Inventory results and methodology.
Participants then shared thoughts and ideas on potential barriers, key partners, enabling actions,
and existing related projects for each measure in facilitated breakout groups. See Appendix E for
a full summary of what participants shared during the second public listening sessions.
MAPC staff also attended several public listening sessions conducted by the state of New
Hampshire for the state’s climate action plan (also funded through CPRG). New Hampshire
RPCs also provided summaries of feedback shared during listening sessions.

23

Figure 8: Summary of priorities and barriers identified during the first public listening session.

Coordination with the States and Other MSAs
Throughout the planning process, MAPC participated in bi-weekly meetings with the
Massachusetts Governor’s Office of Climate Innovation and Resilience, the Southeastern
Regional Planning and Economic Development District (Providence MSA lead), and the
Central Massachusetts Regional Planning Commission (Worcester MSA lead) to coordinate
and share best practices on PCAP development and stakeholder engagement. MAPC also met
with the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services to learn about their state plan
development process and additional priorities of stakeholders in New Hampshire.

24

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

1. “Climate Pollution Reduction Grants.” Environmental Protection Agency. https://www.epa.gov/inflationreduction-act/climate-pollution-reduction-grants.
2. A Metropolitan Statistical Area “MSA” is a federally defined geographic region with shared economic ties and
dense population centers. Under CPRG, 67 of the most populous MSAs within the country were selected
for planning grants.
3. “What Drives New Hampshire Commuters to Take the Bus?” New Hampshire Public Radio, 23 March. 2018,
https://www.nhpr.org/nh-news/2018-03-23/what-drives-n-h-commuters-to-take-the-bus-to-boston
4. Annually Adjusted Census Population Estimates for 2017. Index of /programs-surveys/popest/
datasets/2010-2018/cities/totals (census.gov)
5. The full MSA as defined by the Census Bureau contains more municipalities than the # in our planning area.
As a result, statistical and demographic data used throughout this document is representative of the MSA
as a whole in accordance with the Census definition.
6. “Population of the largest metropolitan areas in the United States in 2022.” Statistica. https://www.statista.
com/statistics/183600/population-of-metropolitan-areas-in-the-us/
7. ”Massachusetts Cities by Population.” Massachusetts Demographics. https://www.massachusettsdemographics.com/cities_by_population
8. “New Hampshire Cities by Population.” New Hampshire Demographics. https://www.newhampshiredemographics.com/cities_by_population
9. “Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH Metro Area [ACS 2022 1-Year Data].” Census Reporter. https://
censusreporter.org/profiles/31000US14460-boston-cambridge-newton-ma-nh-metro-area/
10. “Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH Metro Area [ACS 2022 1-Year Data].” Census Reporter. https://
censusreporter.org/profiles/31000US14460-boston-cambridge-newton-ma-nh-metro-area/
11. “Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH Metro Area [ACS 2022 1-Year Data].” Census Reporter. https://
censusreporter.org/profiles/31000US14460-boston-cambridge-newton-ma-nh-metro-area/
12. “The Greater Boston Housing Report Card 2022: With A Special Analysis of Equity in Subsidized Housing.”
The Boston Foundation, 2022. https://www.tbf.org/-/media/tbf/reports-and-covers/2022/october/part-1from-gbhrc2022_interactive_web.pdf
13. Drehobl, Ariel, et al. “How High Are Household Energy Burdens? An Assessment of National and
Metropolitan Energy Burden across the United States.” American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy
(ACEEE), Sept. 2020, https://www.aceee.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/u2006.pdf.
25

14. ”Energy Burden in Boston,” American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE), Sept. 2020,
https://www.aceee.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/u2006.pdf.
15. ACS 1 year estimates for the MSA: Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH Metro Area - Profile data - Census
Reporter
16. ACS 1 year estimates for the MSA: Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH Metro Area - Profile data - Census
Reporter
17. ”Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH Metro Area: Race and Ethnicity,” United States Census
Bureau, https://data.census.gov/profile/Boston-Cambridge-Newton,_MA-NH_Metro_
Area?g=310XX00US14460#race-and-ethnicity
18. “Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH Metro Area [ACS 2022 1-Year Data].” Census Reporter. https://
censusreporter.org/profiles/31000US14460-boston-cambridge-newton-ma-nh-metro-area/
19. Woods, J. Cedric. ”Native Americans and Massachusetts: Homegoings and Ongoing
Displacements,” Boston Indicators, https://www.bostonindicators.org/-/media/indicators/
boston-indicators-reports/report-files/changing-faces-2019/changingfaces_7native-americans.
pdf?la=en&hash=D75276108D472C1F76996086E8617C825577DB29
20. Woods, J. Cedric. ”Native Americans and Massachusetts: Homegoings and Ongoing
Displacements,” Boston Indicators, https://www.bostonindicators.org/-/media/indicators/
boston-indicators-reports/report-files/changing-faces-2019/changingfaces_7native-americans.
pdf?la=en&hash=D75276108D472C1F76996086E8617C825577DB29
21. ”Federally Recognized Tribes.” U.S. Department of Interior Indian Affairs. https://www.bia.gov/service/
tribal-leaders-directory/federally-recognized-tribes
22. “Tribes in the New England/Northeast Region.” UMass Boston. https://www.umb.edu/naisa/tribes/
23. “About.” Indigenous New Hampshire Collaborative Collective. https://indigenousnh.com/about/.
24. “Green Community Designations Reach Two Hundred Ninety One,” Mass.gov, https://www.mass.gov/doc/
map-of-current-green-communities-and-grant-summaries/download
25. “North Suffolk Zero Carbon Action Plan.” North Suffolk Office of Resilience and Sustainability, GreenRoots,
and MAPC, 2023, https://cms5.revize.com/revize/chelseama/Document_Center/Departments/
Housing%20&%20Community%20Development/Environment%20and%20Climate%20Resilience/
North%20Suffolk%20Office%20of%20Resilience%20and%20Sustainability/NSZCAP%20
Report_6.30.23.pdf
26. ”Massachusetts Clean Energy and Climate Plan for 2025 and 2030,” Executive Office of Energy and
Environmental Affairs, https://www.mass.gov/info-details/massachusetts-clean-energy-and-climate-planfor-2025-and-2030
27. ”MA Decarbonization Roadmap,” Executive Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs, https://www.mass.
gov/info-details/ma-decarbonization-roadmap
26

28. “Municipal Fossil Fuel Free Building Demonstration Program,” Massachusetts Department of Energy
Resources, https://www.mass.gov/info-details/municipal-fossil-fuel-free-building-demonstration-program
29. “Eversource Geothermal Pilot Program,” City of Framingham, https://www.framinghamma.gov/3416/
Geothermal-Pilot-Program; “Networked Geothermal Program,” National Grid, https://www.nationalgridus.
com/media/pdfs/resi-ways-to-save/netgeo-update-lowell-nov-2023.pdf
30. “The first N.H. residents are enrolled in community power, despite bumps with Eversource,” WBUR, 26
April, 2023, https://www.wbur.org/news/2023/04/26/community-power-nashua-eversource
31. “Building Emissions Reduction and Disclosure,” The City of Boston, https://www.boston.gov/departments/
environment/building-emissions-reduction-and-disclosure
32. ”PowerCorpsBOS,” City of Boston, https://www.boston.gov/departments/workforce-development/
powercorpsbos
33. “Good Jobs Metro Boston Coalition,“ City of Boston, https://www.boston.gov/worker-empowerment/goodjobs-metro-boston-coalition
34. “Boston kicks off rollout of 750 electric school buses with first of the fleet transporting students,” Electrek,
24 April, 2023, https://electrek.co/2023/04/24/boston-rollout-750-electric-school-buses-first-fleettransporting-students/
35. ”MetroWest Climate Equity Project,” Metropolitan Area Planning Council, https://www.mapc.org/resourcelibrary/metro-west-climate-equity/
36. LIDAC is a term used by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The EPA defines LIDAC as ”any
community that meets at least one of the following characteristics: 1) Identified as disadvantaged by the
Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool (CEJST); 2) Any census block group that is at or above
the 90th percentile for any of EJScreen’s Supplemental Indexes when compared to the nation or state,
and/or 3) Any geographic area within Tribal lands as included in EJScreen.” See ”Climate Pollution
Reduction Grants: Low Income/Disadvantaged Communities (LIDAC Benefits Analysis,” Environmental
Protection Agency, https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-08/Low%20Income%20%20
Disadvantaged%20Communities%20Benefits%20Analysis.pdf
37. Acton, Arlington, Ashland, Boston*, Bridgewater, Brockton*, Cambridge, Chelsea*, Concord, Framingham,
Gloucester*, Hudson, Lexington, Lawrence*, Lowell*, Melrose, Methuen*, Natick, Newburry, North Andover,
Norwood, Plymouth, Reading, Revere*, Salem*, Weston, Winchester, MA, Derry and Nashua*, NH.
38. Action for Boston Community Development, Inc., Action, Inc., All In Energy, Asian Community Development
Corporation, Authentic Caribbean Foundation, Cambodian Mutual Assistance Association, Citizens Inn,
Conservation Law Foundation, Boston Climate Action Network, Emerald Cities Collaborative, Granite
State Organizing Project, Groundwork Somerville, Grow Nashua, Healthcare without Harm, Massachusetts
Immigrant and Refugee Advocacy Coalition, Merrimack River Watershed Council, Neighborhood of
Affordable Housing, Inc., New England United 4 Justice, Quincy Asian Resources, Roxbury Community
College Foundation, The Latino Support Network, Town Green, Transit Matters, and Voices of the
Community, and one Indigenous Land and Water Conservationist and Environmental Activist.

27

2. Climate Justice in the
Region and LIDAC Analysis
The Greater Boston Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) as defined in this plan comprises 167
municipalities, many that are home to communities that are identified as Low-Income and
Disadvantaged Communities (LIDAC) by the federal government. These communities hold significant
historic and industrial importance, symbolizing the region's enduring involvement in the history of
immigration in America. Today, LIDAC communities are places rich with diverse culture, languages,
community organizations, local businesses, institutions, history, arts, and more. They add to the
tapestry of the area’s heritage and play an integral role in shaping the collective identity of the region.
In an effort to be as inclusive and accurate as possible when identifying the LIDAC communities,
multiple data sources were used to gain a comprehensive understanding of the region. The project
team used three screening tools: the Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool (CEJST)1, the
Environmental Justice Screening and Mapping Tool (EJScreen)2, and the EPA Inflation Reduction
Act (IRA) Disadvantaged Communities designation. These tools identify LIDAC communities by
assessing indicators for categories of burden: air quality, climate change, energy, environmental
hazards, health, housing, legacy pollution, transportation, water and wastewater, and workforce
development.
Within the Boston MSA, 49 municipalities in Massachusetts and ten municipalities in New
Hampshire include at least one census tract designated as a LIDAC community according to the EPA
IRA Disadvantaged Community designation, shown in green in Figure 9. A total of 474 census tracts
in the region are LIDAC communities, which represents 42 percent of census tracts within the MSA. A
detailed list of the specific census tracts designated as LIDAC communities can be found in Appendix C.

“Environmental justice is at the heart of our climate
efforts. Our administration is committed to securing
clean air and water for every resident and ensuring the
benefits of our clean energy transition are distributed in
an equitable way.”
- MA Governor Maura Healey.

28

Figure 9: Map of the Greater Boston MSA’s LIDACs.

In Massachusetts, LIDAC communities have a more specific definition compared to the state's
Environmental Justice designation, which is based on income, race, and language isolation. All
LIDAC communities are considered Environmental Justice communities, but not all designated
Environmental Justice communities are classified as LIDAC communities.
29

2.1.  Climate Impacts and Risks
on LIDAC Communities
The EPA defines Environmental Justice (EJ) as the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of
all people, regardless of their background, in decisions and activities that affect the environment
and human health.3 Integrating EJ principles into climate planning and policy is crucial for
safeguarding communities disproportionately affected by various environmental burdens,
especially in the context of climate change.
In addition to historic and present impacts of environmental pollution on LIDAC communities,
these communities are also often exposed to the “first and worst” of the impacts of climate
change. In the region, the primary climate impacts include an increase in the frequency and
intensity of extreme precipitation events, coastal flooding due to sea level rise and storm surge,
and more frequent extreme heat events. While climate change affects all residents, low-income
and communities of color tend to bear a disproportionate burden of these impacts. Social,
economic, and political factors can make it more difficult to adapt to and recover from climate
change.4

Increases in Extreme Precipitation
The region is expected to experience increases in extreme precipitation events. Over the last
decade, rainfall records have been broken worldwide, with one in four records being attributed
directly to climate.5 The northeast region is experiencing the largest increase in the number of
extreme precipitation days in the US, and this trend is expected to continue.6
Figure 10 shows the expected increases in precipitation between 2030 to 2070 in the region. An
increase in the frequency and severity of extreme precipitation events can overwhelm stormwater
drainage infrastructure or overflow rivers and stream resulting in inland or riverine flooding.
Flooding can result in injury or loss of life, property damage, indoor mold growth, disruption of
utility or essential services (e.g., medical care), temporary or permanent housing displacement,
and water pollution, particularly in areas with combined sewer overflows.

Flooding in Lynn, Massachusetts. Photo by Weston & Sampson
30

Figure 10: Projected increases in precipitation in 2030 and 2070.
Source: Massachusetts precipitation data was sourced from ResilientMass7 operated by the MA EOEEA.
New Hampshire precipitation data was sourced from the 2021 NH Climate Assessment8.
31

Sea Level Rise and Storm Surge in Coastal
Communities
The region also faces rising sea levels and increased intensity of storm events, leading to higher
tides and more frequent coastal flooding. As shown in Figure 11, the likelihood of coastal flooding
is particularly high in the Boston region in both the 0.1% and 1% annual exceedance scenarios.
The impact from these storms and floods can be significant on both regional and local scales.
Like the impacts of extreme rainfall, coastal flooding can also result in risk to public health and
safety, property damage, and service disruptions. Coastal flooding can exacerbate erosion along
the coastline, increasing vulnerability to future storm events, and forcing existing structures to
relocate, permanently close, or undergo costly flood protection measures. Preparing for and
recovering from coastal flooding requires significant time and resources, which are lacking in
many communities.

Increases in Extreme Heat
The region is expected to experience increases in extreme heat (days over 90 degrees) and
longer duration heat waves (3+ days of consecutive extreme heat), as well as warmer springs
and fall seasons. By 2030, the region will experience 12-27 days of extreme heat annually and by
2080, upwards of 80 days over 90 degrees. Average daily temperature in the region will increase
by between 2.5-3°F by 2040.10 This is particularly evident in densely populated areas with less
green space or tree cover, where the urban heat island effect disproportionately impacts LIDAC
communities.11 The region has already felt the effects of these changes and is likely to experience
further rises in extreme heat, such as more days with temperatures exceeding 90 degrees, longer
duration heat waves (three or more consecutive days of extreme heat)12, and warmer spring and
fall seasons. Figure 12 shows the change in the number of days over 90 degrees Fahrenheit for
the Greater Boston MSA from 2030 to 2070.
Extreme heat is the leading cause of weather-related deaths in the United States, and this
phenomenon is worsened by the urban heat island effect. Extreme heat worsens air pollution
and causes adverse health impacts, primarily in older adults, young children, people with chronic
illnesses, and those disproportionately exposed to heat, such as outdoor workers and unhoused
populations. Extreme heat can also strain the electricity grid, posing a risk of brownouts, and
damage building and transportation infrastructure (e.g., train tracks warping, asphalt softening).

Air Quality Risks
Poor air quality from climate pollution poses a risk to LIDAC communities, particularly those in the
inner core of the Greater Boston region. Diesel particulate matter (DPM), a pollutant emitted by
diesel truck engines and exhaust, is a key concern. Recognized by organizations like the EPA and
World Health Organization (WHO) as "carcinogenic to humans" due to over 40 potential cancercausing compounds, prolonged exposure to DPM presents severe public health risks13. Figure
13 shows the DPM levels in the Greater Boston MSA. Communities near busy roads, such as
major highways or urban centers, face heightened exposure to these harmful particulates. In the
outer suburban and rural areas of the MSA, DPM is at lower concentration levels. As expected,
the highest concentrations are within and around the City of Boston, where the population is the
densest, though levels across the MSA still fall within the acceptable range defined by EPA.

32

Figure 11: Massachusetts Coastal Flood Risk Model for the Greater Boston MSA.
Source: Massachusetts CZM Coastal Risk Flood Model Viewer9.
33

Figure 12: Projected increases in days over 90 degrees in 2030 and 2070.
Source: Massachusetts heat data was sourced from ResilientMass8 operated by the MA EOEEA. New
Hampshire heat data was sourced from the 2021 NH Climate Assessment9.
34

Figure 13: Diesel particulate matter level in air in micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3).
Source: EJScreen14

Additional air quality risks in the MSA can be examined using the EPA AirToxScreen assessment
tool. It utilizes the Air Toxics Respiratory Hazards Index to quantify the combined non-cancer
respiratory risk posed by various air toxics, based on EPA-established concentration levels. A
hazard index of one or lower suggests that adverse non-cancer health effects from these air toxics
are improbable over a lifetime of exposure. Shown in Figure 14, the air toxics hazards respiratory
index for the Boston MSA is below an index concentration of one, with the most common
concentration remaining below an index indicator of 0.3. With continued efforts to reduce GHGs
within this plan, this index can remain at low risk for the MSA.
35

Figure 14: Air Toxics Respiratory Hazard Index.
Source: EJScreen15.

Like the effects of DPM, constant exposure to heavy traffic and internal combustion engines
(ICE) can pose risks to human health. In addition to emitting GHGs, ICE vehicles emit carbon
monoxide, nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons, and particle matter. People who live near major roads
have increased incidence and severity of health problems such as increased asthma onset and
aggravation, cardiovascular disease, impaired lung development, and premature death.15 Figure
15 displays the traffic proximity and volume, which the EPA calculates as the average number of
vehicles per day on major roads within 500 meters of the census tract (or the nearest one beyond

36

500 meters), divided by distance in meters15. These emissions levels are higher in denser areas
with more traffic and can also be exacerbated by the lack of public transportation in areas and the
need for driving a personal vehicle. The areas within the Greater Boston MSA with high vehicle
counts largely coincide with those designated as LIDAC communities.

Figure 15: Traffic Proximity and Volume.
Source: EJScreen15.

37

2.2.  LIDAC Benefits Framework
The project team developed a LIDAC Benefits Framework based on input from the Municipal
and Justice40 Advisory Groups. The Framework focuses on five priority categories of benefits
that could result from the measures in this plan beyond reducing GHG emissions. In addition
to stakeholder input, the benefits encompass the Justice40 Initiative categories of investment:
climate change, clean energy and energy efficiency, clean transit, affordable and sustainable
housing, training and workforce development, remediation and reduction of legacy pollution,
and the development of critical clean water and wastewater infrastructure. The LIDAC Benefits
Framework was used in the project team’s GHG reduction measures prioritization process to
ensure the measures prioritized equity and public health benefits.
The five categories of measure benefits evaluated in this plan are:
Leads with Equity

$

Reduces Cost of Living

!

Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens

$

Creates Economic and Job Benefits

Improves Community Resilience to Climate Impacts

Leads with Equity
MAPC defines equity is defined as “the condition of fair and just inclusion into a society. Equity
will exist when those who have been most marginalized have equal access to opportunities,
power, participation, and resources and all have avenues to safe, healthy, productive, and fulfilling
lives. It requires restructuring deeply entrenched systems of privilege and oppression that have
led to the uneven distribution of benefits and burdens over multiple generations.”16
Centering equity in climate planning, programs, and policies should involve four dimensions of
equity defined by the Urban Sustainability Directors Network: procedural equity, distributional
equity, structural equity, and transgenerational equity. Procedural equity means ensuring that
those who have been historically impacted by climate change and environmental harms have
meaningful voice, representation, agency, and priority in engagement and decision-making
processes. Distributional equity means ensuring that those who have been historically impacted

38

by climate change and environmental harms receive proportionally more benefit from clean
energy programs or policies and proportionally less harm. Structural equity means examining
and changing the clean energy systems (e.g., government programs, energy facility siting
processes) that are currently inequitable and privilege some members of society over others.
Finally transgenerational equity means evaluating how energy decisions made today (e.g.,
repairing natural gas infrastructure or the full lifecycle of clean energy products) will impact future
generations and acting to mitigate future harms today.17

Example Outcomes:
• Recognize the current characteristics of inequity in our communities as a baseline to
improve upon and measure and track progress during implementation.
• Empower historically marginalized people and communities to lead and benefit
from the measures while working towards procedural, distributional, structural, and
transgenerational equity.

Reduces Cost of Living
Greater Boston has a very high cost of living for housing, energy, transportation, and food costs.
A combination of factors contributes to the rising cost of housing in the MSA, including population
growth outstripping supply, restrictive local zoning and permitting processes that block housing
construction, high construction costs, speculative investment, an outdated housing stock, and
a backlog in housing production. The risk of displacement is a real concern and is exacerbated
by the region's continuous housing shortage and rising costs. Households in the LIDAC
communities also tend to face disproportionately high energy costs, largely attributable to older
buildings with inefficient equipment.18 At the same time, transportation costs are higher for these
households due to longer commute times, limited access to public transportation, and having
fewer remote or hybrid work options.

Cambridge, Massachusetts. Photo by Weston & Sampson
39

MBTA Green Line Extension. Photo by Weston & Sampson

Example Outcomes:
• Increase housing access while reducing displacement risks by expanding funding and
support for housing assistance programs and renter protections.
• Reduce energy costs by implementing energy efficiency measures in buildings,
adopting municipal aggregation, installing renewable energy, and pursuing net zero building
retrofits.
• Educate landlords, homeowners, and renters about the health and financial benefits
of living and working in energy efficient environments.
• Increase transit affordability and accessibility by expanding access to public transit,
making public transit more affordable, increasing multi-modal transportation and micromobility options, and making electric vehicles and charging more affordable, accessible,
and convenient.
• Limit food waste to reduce household expenses and environmental and climate burdens.
• Improve healthy food access while reducing GHG emissions by increasing accessibility
to locally grown products.

Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens
Polluting industries are often located within LIDAC communities, leading residents to experience
higher levels of air, soil, and water pollution. These neighborhoods are also more likely to host
other pollution-intensive land uses such as landfills, waste and combustion sites, Superfund
and brownfield sites, and be closer to major roads and highways and trucking routes.19 LIDAC
communities also often experience the urban heat island effect and extreme heat, due to
less green space, reduced tree canopy, and less access to indoor cooling compared to other
communities.20 Environmental and climate burdens also place a mental health and stress burden
on the populations experiencing those conditions.
40

Example Outcomes:
• Improve indoor air quality by reducing volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and related
pollutants, while increasing access to improved ventilation systems and cooling.
• Improve neighborhood air, soil, and water quality through zoning, increasing public
transit and multimodal options, green streets21, progressive stormwater management,
brownfield remediation, and other municipal policies.
• Reduce urban heat island and extreme heat effects by increasing parks and green
space, tree cover, splash pads, and reflective paving and rooftops.
• Bolster social infrastructure through provision of communal green and gathering spaces
and car-free urban areas.

Creates Economic and Job Benefits
Residents in LIDAC communities tend to have less access to higher education, work in servicesector and blue collar jobs, and experience lower wages and higher levels of unemployment and
job instability.22 Some LIDAC communities in Greater Boston were historically industrial centers
for the region that have undergone economic transitions and the loss of manufacturing and other
places of employment.23 Additional technological advances in automation and the rise of artificial
intelligence may further change the workforce and job availability. GHG measures can create
good job opportunities that offer living wages, benefits, and advancement opportunities in the
climate or green sector that specifically benefit people living and working in LIDAC communities.

Example Outcomes:
• Provide local sustained pathways to employment through targeted workforce training
and wraparound services in the climate sector for women, people of color, previously
incarcerated individuals, and English as a Second Language communities.
• Provide good job opportunities by working with climate and clean energy employers to
offer apprenticeships and job opportunities to LIDAC community residents.
• Expand municipal and regional partnerships with educational institutions, nonprofits, and businesses to collectively plan for future clean energy job market needs,
provide training and apprenticeships, and foster an ecosystem of opportunity.
• Incentivize green business ownership opportunities and union labor to facilitate
upward economic mobility, economic stability, and job security.

41

Improves Community Resilience to Climate Impacts
As described earlier in this section, LIDAC communities are likely to be located in areas facing
increased climate risks such as flooding, drought, severe storms, and extreme heat. Investments
in these communities in preparedness and resiliency are essential for mitigating the devastating
and unequal effects of extreme climate events.

Example Outcomes:
• Reinforce physical resilience to the effects of extreme events by providing resources and
infrastructure to protect vulnerable populations from climate impacts.
• Create energy resilience via local renewable power generation and backup battery power.
• Enhance social resilience with proactive preparedness programs and training.
• Expand access to quality housing with high performance residential standards for
resilience.
• Expand access to transportation options and ensure that evacuation routes are known
and accessible.
• Promote the control of and access to land and resources for Indigenous communities.
In the GHG Reduction Measures section, each priority GHG reduction measure is evaluated
across these five benefit categories described above. The LIDAC Benefits Analysis section
includes the icon for each relevant benefit category, along with a short description of the specific
benefits that are expected with the implementation of the measure.

Solar maintenance and repair training. Photo by Weston & Sampson
42

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

1. https://screeningtool.geoplatform.gov
2. https://ejscreen.epa.gov/mapper/
3. Environmental Justice | US EPA
4. Climate Vulnerability in Greater Boston: MetroCommon X 2050. Climate Vulnerability Analysis | Greater
Boston Climate Vulnerability Analysis. (mapc.org)
5. Robinson, A., Lehmann, J., Barriopedro, D. et al. Increasing heat and rainfall extremes now far outside the
historical climate. npj Clim Atmos Sci 4, 45 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41612-021-00202-w
6. Davenport, Frances V., et al. “Contribution of historical precipitation change to US flood damages.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 118, no. 4, 11 Jan. 2021, https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2017524118.
7. Massachusetts Executive Office of Environmental Affairs. “ResilientMass Climate Hub”. (n.d.). Mass.gov.
https://resilientma-mapcenter-mass-eoeea.hub.arcgis.com/
8. Lemcke-Stampone, Mary D.; Wake, Cameron P.; and Burakowski, Elizabeth, "New Hampshire Climate
Assessment 2021" (2022). The Sustainability Institute. 71. https://scholars.unh.edu/sustainability/71
9. Massachusetts Office of Coastal Zone Management (CZM). Massachusetts sea level rise and coastal
flooding viewer. (n.d.). Mass.gov. https://www.mass.gov/info-details/massachusetts-sea-level-rise-andcoastal-flooding-viewer
10. Douglas, Ellen, and Paul Kirshen. “Greenribboncommission.” Climate Change Impacts and Projections
for the Greater Boston Area, greenribboncommission.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/GBRAG_
report_05312022@1915.pdf. Accessed 27 Feb. 2024.
11. Climate Change and Social Vulnerability in the United States, Sept. 2021, www.epa.gov/system/files/
documents/2021-09/climate-vulnerability_september-2021_508.pdf.
12. Environmental Protection Agency. (2022, July). Climate Change Indicators: Heat Waves. EPA. https://www.
epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-heat-waves
13. “Diesel Exhaust and Cancer Risk.” American Cancer Society, www.cancer.org/cancer/risk-prevention/
chemicals/diesel-exhaust-and-cancer.html#:~:text=The%20International%20Agency%20for%20
Research,increased%20risk%20of%20lung%20cancer. Accessed 27 Feb. 2024.

43

14. Environmental Protection Agency. (n.d.). EJScreen Map Descriptions. EPA. https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen/
ejscreen-map-descriptions#poll
15. “Mobile Source Pollution.” EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, www.epa.gov/mobile-source-pollution/
learn-about-how-mobile-source-pollution-affects-your-health#near-roadway. Accessed 27 Feb. 2024.
16. Equity at MAPC – MAPC
17. Park, Angela. An Equity Scan of Local Government Sustainability Programs, p.5. USDN. September 2014.
18. “The Greater Boston Housing Report Card 2022: With A Special Analysis of Equity in Subsidized Housing.”
The Boston Foundation, 2022. https://www.tbf.org/-/media/tbf/reports-and-covers/2022/october/part-1from-gbhrc2022_interactive_web.pdf
19. Harvard Chan-NIEHS Center for Environmental Health. “Environmental Racism at the
Neighborhood Level.” ArcGIS StoryMaps, Esri, 15 July 2022, storymaps.arcgis.com/
stories/1ae25711737f4f379e77331b1d428894.
20. Florida, Richard. “Access to Green Space Varies by Class, Race in the U.S.” Bloomberg.Com, Bloomberg,
19 Mar. 2019, www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-03-19/access-to-green-space-varies-by-classrace-in-the-u-s.
21. EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, www.epa.gov/G3/green-street-practices. Accessed 27 Feb. 2024.
22. Edmiston, Kelly. “Why aren’t more people working in low- and moderate-income areas?” The Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, 2 Jan. 2020, https://doi.org/10.18651/4q19edmiston.
23. “About the Gateway Cities.” MassINC, massinc.org/our-work/policy-center/gateway-cities/about-thegateway-cities/. Accessed 27 Feb. 2024.

44

3. Greenhouse Gas Inventory
A baseline greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions inventory is the first step towards understanding
the effectiveness of emissions reductions and measuring progress toward net-zero goals and
targets. The emissions associated with activities occurring within Greater Boston were quantified
for the year 2017. 2017 was selected not only for being a relatively recent year independent of
COVID-19 impacts with high quality, publicly available data, but also because 2017 maintains
consistency with MAPC’s existing Community GHG Inventory Tool, designed for and used by
dozens of communities in Massachusetts.1
This inventory builds upon and streamlines MAPC’s GHG Inventory Tool and resources from EPA
and NH entities, to leverage what communities are familiar with and maintain data quality. In the
CCAP, the GHG inventory will be expanded and updated to a more recent year.
GHG emissions are measured in units of metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2e) or
millions of MTCO2e (MMTCO2e). Global warming potentials for methane and nitrous oxide are
used to normalize these greenhouse gases to CO2, in accordance with the methodology from the
IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report. The following equation is generally used to calculate emissions:

Activity Data
(e.g., kWh, gallons)

X

Emissions Factors
(e.g., MTCO2e/kWh,
MTCO2e/gallon)

=

Emissions
(MTCO2e)

This GHG emissions inventory includes a comprehensive set of emissions sources from
Stationary Energy, Electricity, Transportation, Waste, Agriculture, and Natural and Working
Lands. The sector of emissions sources, key data that informed emissions calculations, and the
emissions in MMTCO2e can be found in Table 3.

The MSA as a whole, including residential, commercial,
and municipal activities, was responsible for emitting

41.9 MMTCO2e in 2017.

45

Table 3: GHG Emissions Inventory Sectors, Key Data, and Resulting Emissions
Sector

Subsector

Residential and commercial/
institutional usage (natural
gas, fuel oil), off-road
equipment

Residential Buildings

9.0

C/I Buildings &
Manufacturing
Industries

8.8

Construction

0.5

Residential & commercial
/ institutional usage,
transmission and distribution
losses
(investor-owned utilities,
municipal utilities, and
community aggregation)

Residential Buildings

2.9

C/I Buildings &
Manufacturing
Industries

5.6

Passenger vehicles,
commercial vehicles, public
transportation (bus, rail, ferry)

On-road (and MBTA
Ferries)

15.1

Rail

0.2

Landfilled and incinerated
waste, composted and
anaerobically digested waste,
wastewater

Waste

2.3

Commercial fertilizer usage

Fertilizer

0.03

i-Tree carbon sequestration
based on canopy

Carbon
Sequestration

-2.5

Stationary
Energy

Electricity

Emissions
(MMT CO2e)

Key Data

Transportation

Waste

Agriculture

Natural &
Working Lands
Total Net Emissions (MMT CO2e)

41.9

46

Figure 16: 2017 GHG Emissions by Sector

The distribution of 2017 GHG emissions inventory results by sector and subsector are
summarized in Figures 16 and 17. The three largest emitting sectors in Greater Boston are
buildings, transportation, and electricity. The three largest subsectors are commercial &
industrial buildings and manufacturing industries, residential buildings, and passenger vehicles.
These results compare favorably to the Massachusetts statewide 2017 emissions inventory
of approximately 73 MMT CO2e, which identified transportation (42%), buildings (27%), and
electricity (19%) and the highest emitting sectors.2

Figure 17: 2017 GHG Emissions by Subsector
Additional information about data sources and methodology can be found in Appendix A.
47

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

1. https://www.mapc.org/resource-library/community-ghg-inventory-resources/
2. MA Decarbonization Roadmap. https://www.mass.gov/info-details/ma-decarbonization-roadmap

Cushing Memorial Park in Framingham, Massachusetts. Photo by Weston & Sampson
48

4. Greenhouse Gas
Reduction Measures
The Greater Boston PCAP includes 11 GHG reduction measures across the Buildings, Transportation,
Energy Generation, and Waste sectors. These 11 measures are not inclusive of all of Greater Boston’s
many climate priorities but represent a sub-set of measures that are implementation-ready, will lead
to GHG emissions reductions by 2030, and will advance equity in the region.
Each GHG Reduction Measure includes the following information:
Description of the Measure, including relevant background information and specific
actions that municipalities, groups of municipalities, regional government agencies, and
partners can take to implement the measure.
Geographic Scope of where the measure can be implemented.

GHG Emissions Reduction estimates for the year 2030 that can be realized by
implementing the measure.
LIDAC Benefits Analysis that identifies the co-benefits of the measure (described in
Section 2.1.2).
Implementation Details, including the Lead and Partner Implementing Agencies, an
analysis of Authority to Implement, the Implementation Timeline and Milestones, and
Metrics to Track Progress.
Other Funding Available that could support implementation of the measure. The measure
descriptions include the name of the funding, and further detail can be found in Appendix C.
Workforce Development Opportunities that would support implementation of the
measure, as applicable.
Examples of Successful Projects or Programs in the Region similar or related to
the measure.
Policy Priorities or keys to successful implementation and realization of benefits of
the measure.
Table 4 summarizes Greater Boston’s 11 priority measures and the subsequent sections
include further details on each measure.

49

Table 4: Greater Boston's Priority Measures
Buildings
B1. Building
Decarbonization
Technical Assistance

Expand and improve technical assistance programs, decarbonization
planning resources, and outreach and education efforts.

B2. Building
Decarbonization
Financial Assistance

Expand funding for comprehensive building decarbonization, particularly
for affordable housing, renters/landlords, and small businesses; explore
creative funding and financing solutions and opportunities to address
the intersection of energy, health, and housing.

B3. Net-Zero Municipal
Buildings

Develop and implement a plan to decarbonize new and existing
municipal buildings; establish technical assistance programs to support
municipal decarbonization planning and financing.

B4. District Scale
Renewable Thermal
Energy Projects

Implement networked geothermal or water-based district heating
and cooling projects through municipal ownership and public-private
partnerships; support participation of low-moderate income customers.

Transportation
T1. Public Transit
Access and
Affordability

Expand public transit service, increase frequency and reliability of transit
services, implement fare free routes and passes, and make stops and
stations more accessible.

T2. Multi-Modal
Transportation

Expand multi-modal transportation networks by building, improving,
and expanding walking and cycling infrastructure that is safe, wellconnected, and accessible.

T3. Electric Vehicle
Affordability

Increase the affordability and accessibility of EVs through EV car share
programs, technical and financial assistance to purchase EVs, used EV
markets, group purchasing, and education.

T4. Electric Vehicle
Charging

Deploy public EV chargers near multifamily housing and commercial
centers, explore charging incentives, and educate potential EV users
about charging.

Electricity Generation
E1. Renewable Energy
Projects

Deploy community shared solar, energy storage, microgrid, and other
renewable energy projects; provide technical assistance and support for
communities to access incentives and financing to develop renewable
energy projects.

E2. Municipal
Aggregation

Adopt municipal aggregation programs, increase the percentage
of Class I RECs in program offerings, and implement low-moderate
income customer pricing tiers.

Waste
W1. Reduce Solid
Waste Going to Landfills
and Incinerators

Establish regional composting sites; explore collective procurement of
solid waste disposal and recycling services; expand re-use programs

50

4.1.  Buildings
GHG emissions from the buildings sector result from onsite fuel combustion, electricity used
in buildings, and the lifecycle and construction of new buildings. Most energy in buildings is
used for space heating and cooling, ventilation, hot water, cooking, and lighting. The buildings
sector is the highest emitting sector in Greater Boston, responsible for 58 percent of total
emissions. Within the buildings sector, Residential (Res) buildings account for 48 percent of
emissions and Commercial, Institutional, and Manufacturing (C/I/M) buildings account for 52
percent of emissions. Approximately 64 percent of emissions result from on-site fuel combustion
(47 percent natural gas and 16 percent fuel oil). The remaining 36 percent of emissions are
attributable to electricity usage in buildings.

Figure 18: Breakdown of Buildings Sector GHG Emission by Fuel and Building Type in 2017.

In addition to contributing to climate change, emissions from the buildings sector significantly
impact the health of occupants and community members. Fossil fuel appliances in homes,
businesses, schools, and other buildings emit carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxide (NOx),
particulate matter (PM), and other pollutants, which increases the likelihood that occupants
develop or exacerbate existing respiratory illnesses. For example, gas stoves can contribute
to increased asthma risks, and appliances vented outdoors can impact community members’
respiratory, cardiovascular, and nervous system health.1 As a result of racist housing policies
such as redlining, highway and industrial siting in predominantly low-income communities of
color, continuing disinvestment, and other factors, people of color in the United States have twice
the exposure to outdoor particulate matter (PM 2.5) from residential gas combustion as White
people.2 Removing onsite combustion by electrifying heating, cooking, and other fossil fuelpowered appliances can improve indoor air quality.3
51

U.S. households living in low-income multifamily buildings and older buildings, which tend to
be less energy efficient, pay a higher percentage of their household’s gross income on energy.4
The median energy burden (defined as percentage of income spent on energy) of low-income
households in Greater Boston is 10.3 percent, compared to the overall median household energy
burden of 3.1 percent. Approximately 32 percent of Black households and 30 percent of Hispanic
households pay over 6 percent of their income for energy, which is considered a high energy
burden.5
In Massachusetts, strides have been made to address building emissions in new construction
and major renovations through the state’s Stretch Energy Code and Specialized Energy
Code, which are based on the 2021 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) with
Massachusetts-specific modifications. The Specialized Code, which had already been adopted
by 24 municipalities within the region as of December 2023, will help facilitate all-electric new
construction and set communities on the path toward net zero and healthier buildings.6 In 2022,
New Hampshire adopted the 2018 IECC.7
The region faces continuing challenges, including barriers to reducing emissions from the
existing building stock, addressing split incentives to decarbonize renter-occupied units, and
updating grid infrastructure to enable electrification. The states, municipalities, RPAs/RPCs, and
regulators will need to work to address these technical and financial barriers for communities to
scale up building electrification.

The priority buildings measures in this plan aim to reduce
emissions by:
(B1) providing technical assistance for building decarbonization,
(B2) developing financial assistance for building decarbonization,
(B3) supporting net zero municipal buildings, and
(B4) developing district scale renewable thermal energy projects
for heating and cooling buildings.

52

Buildings
B1. Building Decarbonization Technical Assistance
Comprehensive decarbonization of existing buildings is a complex process and requires detailed
planning and coordination. Many barriers further complicate retrofitting buildings, including lack
of knowledge of decarbonization measures and potential costs, building ownership, uncertainty
about technology performance, unclear or limited pathways to obtain financial incentives, and
physical and structural barriers (e.g. roof replacement). Building owners often receive confusing
or conflicting information from service providers and encounter challenges understanding and
accessing incentive programs, which can limit interest in or ability to move forward.
Existing incentive programs, such as Mass Save and New Hampshire Saves (NHSaves)
utility programs, provide significant incentives for some decarbonization measures but have
historically underserved renters, low-to-moderate income households, and affordable housing.8
Nonparticipants tend to have lower trust in programs perceived as government led, fear of energy
scams, and prioritize immediate needs over long-term investments.9 Municipalities seeking to
engage historically underserved populations in decarbonization efforts must confront the impact of
discriminatory policies and predatory programs. Municipalities must also build trusted, long-term
relationships with community-based organizations who are already delivering services (e.g. fuel
assistance) and may be able to connect residents more effectively with programs. Additionally,
multifamily buildings (particularly affordable housing) with large numbers of renters have
limited agency to pursue decarbonization, and engagement with landlords has historically been
challenging.
Municipalities, coalitions of municipalities, and RPAs/RPCs should:
1.	 Deliver building decarbonization technical and planning assistance to building owners,
especially multifamily and affordable housing owners, through establishing new efforts (e.g.
energy coaching, community liaisons, community-based outreach programs).
2.	 Coordinate with and build on existing technical assistance efforts (e.g. community action
agency programs, Mass Save Community First Partnership, NH Saves), resource platforms,
and communities of practice, such as the forthcoming Massachusetts Building Decarbonization
Clearinghouse and New England Onsite Energy Assistance Partnership.
3.	 Use key communication pathways to conduct outreach on the various benefits of building
decarbonization and incentive program opportunities, as well as increase enrollment in
subsidized electricity rates and heating assistance programs.

Geographic Scope:

This measure is applicable in all
municipalities. Additional resources
should be directed and tailored to
LIDAC communities, particularly in
communities with high rental rates and
language access needs.

GHG Emissions Reductions
270,875 to 320,125 MTCO2e/year
The estimated emissions reductions
are based on a 10-30% increase in
energy savings based on Mass Save
incentive data. See Appendix B for
additional information.

53

Buildings
B1. Building Decarbonization Technical Assistance
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Reduces Cost of Living: Reduces household energy costs.
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Improves indoor air quality; Can improve
mental health by reducing stress and anxiety associated with energy costs.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Opportunity to increase local jobs and training programs.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipalities, municipal light plants,
• RPAs/RPCs
• Public housing authorities and privately-owned subsidized housing developers/owners
• Utility program administrators and regulators overseeing energy efficiency programs
• State agencies, such as Massachusetts Clean Energy Center
• Building trade unions and training institution partners
• Local and regional community-based organizations

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1-2: Work with state and regional agencies and utilities to identify existing building
decarbonization technical assistance accessible to building occupants and owners; develop
supplemental local or regional technical assistance programs; identify local partners to support
technical assistance, outreach, and education efforts, especially to environmental justice/LIDAC
communities.
• Year 2-3: Implement technical assistance programs; consider targeting specific sectors with
different outreach strategies.
• Year 3+: Refine technical assistance based on lessons learned from engagement and new
technical assistance platforms; broaden reach through additional partners and sectors.

Metrics to Track Progress
• Participation of low- and moderate-income residents in building decarbonization programs
facilitated by municipal engagement
• Number and strength of partnerships
• Expansion of local/regional technical assistance to support building decarbonization
• Residents and businesses engaged by technical assistance programs

54

Buildings
B1. Building Decarbonization Technical Assistance
Other Funding Available
• Federal: Home Energy Rebates and
Home Electrification and Appliance
Rebate Programs, Building Codes
Implementation for Efficiency and
Resilience Program
• MA: MassCEC EmPower
Massachusetts, MassCEC Building
Electrification and Transformation
Accelerator, Mass Save Community
First Partnerships and technical
assistance studies
• NH: NH Saves Programs

Examples of Success
in the Region
• Mass Save’s Community First
Partnership: Thirteen municipalities
in the MSA participate in the
program, which provides funding
and assistance to municipalities and
community-based organizations
conducting outreach, marketing, and
education related to energy efficiency
programs.10
• Decarbonization technical
assistance and coaching:
Municipal-led programs include
Electrify Cambridge and regional
volunteer-led initiatives HeatSmart
Alliance.

Workforce Development
Opportunities
Municipal and regional programs
can support workforce development
through establishing project labor
agreements such as local hiring/labor,
apprenticeship programs, and use of
prevailing wages. Municipalities can
coordinate with training providers,
community-based organizations,
and technical assistance programs
to emphasize job and training
opportunities. When hiring vendors,
service providers, or energy coaches,
municipalities can prioritize hiring that
represents community demographics,
including bilingual staff.

Policy Priorities
• State: (1) Include decarbonization
assessments, Community First
Partnership expansion, and other
offerings in the 2025-2027 Mass
Save Three-Year Plan; (2) Launch
the Massachusetts Decarbonization
Clearinghouse; (3) Approve enabling
energy efficiency ratepayer funds
to support fuel switching in New
Hampshire.
• Municipal: (1) In Massachusetts,
adopt the Stretch Energy or
Specialized Energy codes.

55

Buildings
B2. Building Decarbonization Financial Assistance
Building decarbonization requires significant investments, including weatherization, electrification
of heating and cooling, and installation of on-site renewables. Retrofitting renter-occupied buildings
is especially challenging, largely due to the disincentive for landlords to invest in improvements
because the tenant receives the cost savings through lower energy costs. Older buildings often
require non-energy investments such as removing asbestos, replacing knob and tube wiring, and
repairing old roofs prior to weatherization and energy efficiency upgrades, greatly increasing costs
and challenges for retrofits. These challenges are particularly prominent in public housing and
privately-owned subsidized housing, where capital budgets are limited and must be balanced with
other maintenance needs.
Existing decarbonization and energy efficiency programs (e.g. Mass Save, NHSaves, municipal
light plant incentives) partially address financial barriers, but renters, residents with lower
educational attainment, and low- and moderate-income residents are less likely to benefit from
some of these programs.11 Furthermore, current levels of funding are insufficient to enable costeffective, deep decarbonization. Greater outreach, technical assistance, and targeted incentives
can encourage adoption in priority demographics. Municipal light plants also have opportunities to
increase incentives for building decarbonization.
Municipalities, coalitions of municipalities, and RPAs/RPCs should:
1.	 Expand and refine existing financial assistance programs to broaden support for
comprehensive decarbonization approaches and increase accessibility (e.g. on-bill financing,
increased support for moderate income customers, additional funding and coordination for preweatherization barriers, streamlined incentive process)
2.	 Establish limited financial assistance programs to target underserved sectors, including
renters/landlords serving low- and moderate-income residents, affordable housing, low- and
moderate-income homeowners, and small businesses. Ensure programs include mechanisms
to avoid tenant displacement, such as affordability covenants, when upgrades are made.12
3.	 Explore opportunities for regional actions that can provide additional financial assistance (e.g.
regional carbon offset funds tied to building performance standard compliance) and reduce
costs (e.g. joint procurement programs)
4.	 Identify and coordinate opportunities to combine building decarbonization financial and
technical assistance with funding for health and pre-weatherization barriers.

Geographic Scope

This measure is applicable to all
municipalities in the MSA, with a focus
on affordable and rental housing in
LIDAC communities. Opportunities
may vary depending on utility territory.

GHG Emissions Reductions
320,125 to 369,375 MTCO2e/year
The estimated emissions reductions
are based on a 30-50% increase in
energy savings based on Mass Save
incentive data. See Appendix B for
additional information.

56

Buildings
B2. Building Decarbonization Financial Assistance
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Leads with Equity: Improves access to incentives and financing for low- and moderate-income
households.
• Reduces Cost of Living: Reduces energy costs for households and businesses.
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Improves indoor air quality; Can improve
mental health by reducing stress and anxiety associated with energy costs.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Opportunity to increase local jobs and training programs.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipalities, municipal light plants
• Public housing authorities and privately-owned subsidized housing developers/owners
• RPAs/RPCs
• Utility program administrators and regulators overseeing energy efficiency programs
• State agencies, such as Massachusetts Clean Energy Center
• Trade unions and training institution partners
• Local and regional community-based organizations, social service providers

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1-2: Identify gaps in building decarbonization financial assistance programs within
municipalities or across multiple municipalities working together; identify opportunities to
develop local or regional programs; for municipal utilities, review incentives relative to programs
from other jurisdictions and consider opportunities to align existing programs with local
decarbonization goals.
• Year 2-3+: Design and implement financial assistance programs and seek available funding.

Metrics to Track Progress
• Increase in delivery of financial assistance and building decarbonization measures to low- and
moderate-income households and small businesses
• Establishment/expansion of local and regional decarbonization financial assistance programs
• Increase in municipal outreach and relationship building with community-based organizations
• Number of residents and businesses that received financial assistance for decarbonization
• Square footage or number of affordable housing units retrofitted/rehabilitated

57

Buildings
B2. Building Decarbonization Financial Assistance
Other Funding Available
• Federal: Home Energy and Home
Electrification and Appliance Rebate
Programs, Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Block Grant Program,
Solar for All, Inflation Reduction Act
Tax Credits, US HUD Green and
Resilient Retrofit Program (GRRP),
Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund,
Weatherization Assistance Program,
US Dept. Of Treasury Capital Magnet
Fund
• MA: Mass Save Programs,
Weatherization Assistance
Programs (Income-Eligible LEAN
Deep Energy Retrofit, Low- and
Moderate-Income Decarbonization
Program) MassCEC Equity
Workforce Planning and Capacity
Grants, Commonwealth Corporation
Workforce Training Fund Program,
HousingWorks Sustainable and
Green Housing Initiatives, Affordable
Housing Trust Fund, MassHousing
Climate Ready Housing Program,
MassHousing Neighborhood
Stabilization Program

Policy Priorities
• State and Federal: (1) Expand
the electric grid capacity from
transmission to site-level
distribution (through Electric Sector
Modernization Plans and other
efforts); (2) Increase funding for
Mass Save programs for low- and
moderate-income customers,
renters, and other underserved
groups through the Energy
Efficiency Advisory Council and
Three-Year 2025-2027 Mass Save
Plan; (3) Launch the Massachusetts
Decarbonization Clearinghouse;
(4) Create new energy affordability
programs; (5) Develop financial
assistance for weatherizationbarriers in New Hampshire and
expand the Massachusetts’ LEAN
program eligibility and impact; (6)
Increase funding for affordable
housing retrofits, including
MassHousing, Housing Works, and
HUDs Green and Resilient Retrofit
Program.

• NH: NH Saves Programs

Examples of Success
Workforce Development
Opportunities

Financial assistance programs
typically do not directly fund workforce
development but can contribute
to increases in opportunities for
contractors/tradespeople to deliver
weatherization, HVAC, and other
measures, and facilities management
staff.

• Massachusetts Community Climate
Bank: will provide $50 million in seed
funding to attract private and public
capital for the retrofit of low- and
moderate-income housing in the state.13
• Inflation Reduction Act’s Home
Efficiency and Home Electrification
Appliance Rebate Programs: are
expected to deliver approximately
$180 million to Massachusetts
and New Hampshire to support
whole-building energy retrofits and
electrification respectively.14

Buildings
B3. Net-Zero Municipal Buildings
Municipal buildings offer a clear pathway for GHG reductions because municipalities own their
buildings and can model and inspire similar action by others in the community and invite the public
to see elements of their updated buildings. Across the country, schools are among the top energy
consumers in the public sector and decarbonization measures also offer significant health and
resilience benefits to students (e.g. air quality, cooling in extreme heat).15 Through a 20 percent
reduction in energy use at local government buildings nationwide, local governments could save
almost $4 billion annually, potentially reducing costs for taxpayers.16
Municipalities, coalitions of municipalities, and RPAs/RPCs should:
1.	 Develop and implement plans (through the Massachusetts Climate Leader Communities
certification or otherwise) to transition new and existing municipal buildings to net zero buildings
through weatherization, building electrification, and renewable energy deployment. Prioritize
decarbonization of municipal buildings serving LIDAC communities.
2.	 Establish a regional or state technical assistance program (prioritizing LIDAC communities)
and municipal community of practice to support decarbonization transition planning (e.g.
retro commissioning studies, decarbonization audits, renewable energy site evaluation) and
implementation, including legal support on tax credits and direct pay assistance and support to
identify financial instruments to reduce the cost of electrification.

Geographic Scope

GHG Emissions Reductions

This measure is applicable in
municipalities throughout the MSA.
Public buildings located in and serving
LIDAC communities should be
prioritized, and technical assistance
should be prioritized to support
communities with limited resources.

39,933 to 59,900
MTCO2e/year
The estimated emissions reductions
are based on a municipal building
energy reduction of 10% to 15%. See
Appendix B for additional information.

59

Buildings
B3. Net-Zero Municipal Buildings
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Improves indoor air quality and can reduce
heat stress/exposure in buildings open to the public.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Building retrofits provide increased training and
opportunities for good jobs; Lowers energy bills for municipalities, saving on costs and reducing
long-term maintenance.
• Improves Community Resilience to Climate Impacts: Improves resilience of community facilities
often used for emergency shelters, cooling centers, and other critical services; Allows buildings to
maintain heating and cooling longer in the case of a power outage.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipalities
• RPAs/RPCs
• Massachusetts Public School Districts, New Hampshire School Boards and New Hampshire
Public Charter Schools
• State agencies, such as Massachusetts School Building Authority, Massachusetts Clean Energy
Center
• Utility program administrators
• Community-based organizations
• Trade unions, training institutions

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1-2: Municipalities complete decarbonization roadmaps (in Massachusetts, as part of the
state’s Green Communities Climate Leader Communities Program) and RPAs/RPCs develop a
related community of practice for municipalities to share challenges and learnings.
• Year 3: Municipalities and RPAs/RPCs work with partners to launch a dedicated technical
assistance program for municipalities.

Metrics to Track Progress
• Increase in square feet and number of net zero municipal buildings
• Increase in square feet and number of net zero municipal buildings in LIDAC communities
• Technical assistance delivered to municipalities with LIDAC communities

60

Buildings
B3. Net-Zero Municipal Buildings
Workforce Development
Opportunities

Municipalities should adopt clean
energy procurement and contracting
policies to encourage the hiring
of Minority and Women-Owned
Business Enterprises (e.g. MWBE
companies in Mass Save’s Heat
Pump Installer Network) and reduce
barriers to equitable access to
municipal contracts.17 Municipalities
may also partner with vocational
training programs, post-secondary
institutions, or non-profit led
programs. The City of Boston, for
example, is coordinating its new net
zero mandate for municipal buildings
with efforts to support existing training
programs and create its own training
like PowerCorpsBOS.18

Other Funding Available
• Federal: Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Block Grant Program,
Grant Funding to Address Indoor Air
Pollution at Schools, Community
Facilities Direct Loan and Grant
Program, Elective Pay for Tax Credits
• MA: Community Compact Program,
Mass Save Programs, Green
Communities Climate Leader
Communities, Massachusetts Green
Communities, Massachusetts
School Building Authority, Energy
Performance or Energy Service
Contracts
• NH: Community Development
Finance Authority’s Clean Energy
Fund, Community Facilities Energy
Assessment Grants, Energy
Performance or Energy Service
Contracts

Policy Priorities
• State: (1) Adopt a statewide
Building Performance Standard
in Massachusetts; (2) Provide
additional funding for green and
healthy school construction and
renovations; (3) Provide additional
funding to support the new Climate
Leaders program in Massachusetts;
(4) Adopt an updated energy code
in New Hampshire and continue
strengthening the Stretch and
Specialized codes during update
cycles in Massachusetts.
• Municipal: (1) Massachusetts
municipalities opt-in to the Stretch
Energy Code or Specialized Energy
Code; (2) Adopt policy that requires
new municipal buildings and schools
to be high performance net zero or
near net zero buildings.

Examples of Success
in the Region
• Massachusetts Green
Communities Program: recognizes
municipalities that commit to
implementing a series of energy
reduction measures (e.g. fuelefficient vehicle policy, plan for
20 percent energy reduction at
municipal facilities).
• New Hampshire Department of
Energy: Offers a range of grants,
rebates, and revolving loans for
counties, municipalities, and
schools.19

61

Buildings
B4. District Scale Renewable Thermal Energy Projects
In the Greater Boston region, most heating systems in buildings are fueled by natural gas and
delivered fuels like propane and oil. Many residential buildings lack cooling, despite increased
incidence of extreme heat. In addition to building electrification technologies that serve individual
buildings, there is growing interest in and development of networked thermal energy systems,
including networked geothermal and district energy. Networked systems can be a cost-effective
way of providing heating and cooling to multiple buildings within a neighborhood or district using
heat pumps and a common thermal energy resource (e.g. communal geothermal ground loop).
Networked geothermal systems serving diverse building types with different heating and cooling
usage patterns can deliver improved efficiency compared to individual systems (limiting added
grid demand compared to multiple individual systems)20 and use existing public rights-of-way for
ground loops and connections (limiting impacts to individual properties).21 Water-based district
energy systems may also use waste heat, such as from sewers or data servers, to improve the
system's efficiency.
As networked system efforts expand under enabling legislation and recent regulatory orders,22
municipalities have many opportunities to facilitate development of thermal networks, including
conducting feasibility studies, coordinating with utility/other system owners on system planning,
engaging building owners to participate in projects under development, prioritizing development
in LIDAC communities, exploring opportunities for connecting municipal buildings to networked
systems, hosting system infrastructure on municipal properties, and owning networked systems.
Municipalities, coalitions of municipalities, and RPAs/RPCs should:
1.	 Pilot, accelerate, and facilitate networked geothermal or water-based district heating and
cooling projects in key neighborhoods.
2.	 Explore municipal ownership and public-private partnership structures to accelerate project
development
3.	 Establish support for low- and moderate-income customers to participate in and benefit from
networked thermal projects.

Geographic Scope

Thermal networks can serve districts
across the entire MSA, though
projects will deliver the most benefits
compared to individual heat pump
systems in districts with medium- to
heavy-building density with diverse
building loads.

GHG Emissions Reductions
1,468 to 2,935 MTCO2e/year
The estimated emissions reductions
are based on 5-10 new networked
geothermal projects coming online by
2030. See Appendix B for additional
information.

62

Buildings
B4. District Scale Renewable Thermal Energy Projects
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Reduces Cost of Living: With program design to support low- and moderate-income
households, can reduce household energy burden.
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Improves indoor air quality and local air
quality by reducing on-site combustion of fossil fuels; reduces heat stress for residents from high
heat days.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Project development can provide increased training and
opportunities for good jobs.
• Improves Community Resilience to Climate Impacts: Systems that provide cooling reduce
heat stress for residents.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipalities and School Districts
• Utilities
• District energy or geothermal installers and contractors
• Local non-profits
• Financers
• State agencies, such as Mass Clean Energy Center, Massachusetts Department of Energy
Resources, New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, New Hampshire
Department of Energy

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1-2: Project scoping, design and engineering, financing/funding, regulatory approval (if
needed), and permitting.
• Year 2-4: Project construction
• Year 3-5: Project commissioning and operation

Metrics to Track Progress
• Number of buildings or square footage served by networked geothermal systems
• Number of residents in LIDAC communities served by district thermal projects

63

Buildings
B4. District Scale Renewable Thermal Energy Projects
Other Funding Available
• Federal: Residential Clean Energy
Tax Credit, High-Efficiency Electric
Home Rebate Program
• MA: Community Compact,
MassCEC Kickstart Massachusetts

Policy Priorities
• State: (1) Engage legislators in
New Hampshire to pass legislation
to allow municipalities and utilities
to own district geothermal networks
and sell services to customers; (2)
in Massachusetts, encourage the
Department of Public Utilities to
expedite approval of future utilityowned networked geothermal
projects upon completion of initial
pilots; (3) Provide funding to
support networked geothermal
projects owned and operated by
municipalities and/or communitybased organizations.
• Municipal: 1) Update and adopt
zoning and land use policies to
encourage density and mixed energy
load requirements suitable for
district thermal projects; (2) Require
feasibility studies for networked
renewable and thermal energy
systems in projects larger than a
certain size or during special permit
approval processes.

Workforce Development
Opportunities
Construction of networked geothermal
systems brings together a variety
of skilled trades, from HVAC and
electrical infrastructure installation
to borehole drilling and installation
of piping for the ground loop. In
particular, the engagement of gas
utilities in replacing gas pipelines with
networked geothermal systems can
enable their workers to be retrained
to support installation of networked
geothermal ground loop piping.

Examples of Success
in the Region
• Massachusetts Networked
Geothermal Pilots: Two networked
geothermal pilot projects are under
development in Framingham23
and Lowell24 in Massachusetts.
Eversource and National Grid
broke ground on these projects in
2023, and they are expected to be
operational in 2024/2025.

64

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

1. Minkara, Amneh, et al. “The Outdoor Pollution Is Coming from Inside the House: National Building Pollution
Report.” We Act for Environmental Justice, https://www.weact.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/
AppliancePollution_Report_FINAL.pdf.
2. Dennison, Jim, et al. “How Air Agencies Can Help End Fossil Fuel Pollution from Buildings.” RMI, 2021,
https://rmi.org/insight/outdoor-air-quality-brief/.
3. “All-Electric Buildings Are Healthy Buildings,” Rocky Mountain Institute, https://rmi.org/wp-content/
uploads/2022/02/all_electric_buildings_healthy_factsheet.pdf
4. Drehobl, Ariel, et al. “How High Are Household Energy Burdens? An Assessment of National and
Metropolitan Energy Burden across the United States.” American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy
(ACEEE), Sept. 2020, https://www.aceee.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/u2006.pdf.
5. “Energy Burdens in Boston.” American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE), Sept. 2020,
https://www.aceee.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/aceee-01_energy_burden_-_boston.pdf.
6. “Massachusetts Building Energy Code Adoption by Municipality.” Massachusetts Department of Energy
Resources, 2023, https://www.mass.gov/doc/building-energy-code-adoption-by-municipality/download.
7. “Energy Codes.” New Hampshire Department of Energy, https://www.energy.nh.gov/renewable-energy/
energy-codes.
8. “Residential Nonparticipant Market Characterization and Barriers Study,” Mass Save, https://ma-eeac.org/
wp-content/uploads/C-Team-Q3-2023-Presentation-12.20.pdf
9. “Residential Nonparticipant Market Characterization and Barriers Study,” Mass Save, https://ma-eeac.org/
wp-content/uploads/C-Team-Q3-2023-Presentation-12.20.pdf
10. ”Community First Partnership,” Mass Save, https://www.masssave.com/trade-partners/communitypartnership
11. https://ma-eeac.org/wp-content/uploads/MA19R04-A-NP-Nonpart-MarketBarriersStudy_Final.pdf
12. ”Energy Efficiency and Anti-Displacement Toolkit,” American Council for an Energy Efficient
Economy, https://www.aceee.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/toolkit_1._energy_efficiency_and_antidisplacement_11-15-22.pdf

65

13. ”Governor Healey Announces Creation of Massachusetts Community Climate Bank, Nation’s First Green
Bank Dedicated to Affordable Housing,” Massachusetts Office of Climate Innovation and Resilience,
https://www.mass.gov/news/governor-healey-announces-creation-of-massachusetts-communityclimate-bank-nations-first-green-bank-dedicated-to-affordable-housing
14. Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources. “Federal IRA Rebates Overview: HER and HEAR.”
Massachusetts Energy Efficiency Advisory Council, Nov. 2023. https://ma-eeac.org/wp-content/uploads/
HERS-and-HEAR-Overview-for-EEAC-11-13-23.pdf
15. Ross, Sara, and Jason Acosta Espinosa. “Time for Massachusetts to Make All Schools, Green, Healthy
and Carbon-Free.” The 74, 11 Sept. 2022, https://www.the74million.org/article/time-for-massachusettsto-make-all-schools-green-healthy-and-carbon-free/#:~:text=Nationwide%2C%20schools%20are%20
the%20second,students%2C%20are%20victims%20of%20it
16. “Local Government.” Better Buildings, U.S. Department of Energy, https://betterbuildingssolutioncenter.
energy.gov/sectors/local-government
17. “Municipal Guide to Inclusive Climate Action and Equitable Procurement.” NECEC, https://www.necec.org/
files/necec/pdfs/NECEC_Municipalities%20Guide%202023_Optimized.pdf
18. “Mayor Michelle Wu Signs Executive Order Banning Fossil Fuels in New City-Owned Buildings.” City of
Boston, 31 July 2023, https://www.boston.gov/news/mayor-michelle-wu-signs-executive-order-banningfossil-fuels-new-city-owned-buildings
19. ”Funding Opportunities for Cities, Towns, Counties, and Schools” NH Department of Energy. https://www.
energy.nh.gov/funding-opportunities/funding-opportunities-cities-towns-counties-and-schools
20. Oh, Hyunjun, and Koenraad Beckers. “Cost and Performance Analysis for Five Existing Geothermal Heat
Pump-Based District Energy Systems in the United States.” Golden, CO: National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, 2023. NREL/TP-5700-86678. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy23osti/86678.pdf
21. HEET and BuroHappold Engineering. “Geothermal Networks: 2019 Feasibility Study.” 2019. https://
uploads-ssl.webflow.com/649aeb5aaa8188e00cea66bb/656f8ad67bbc7df081e3fe17_Buro-HappoldGeothermal-Network-Feasibility-Study.pdf
22. Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities. DPU 20-80, Order on Regulatory Principles and Framework,
6 Dec. 2023 https://fileservice.eea.comacloud.net/FileService.Api/file/FileRoom/18297602
23. “Eversource Geothermal Pilot Program.” Eversource Geothermal Pilot Program | City of Framingham, MA
Official Website, www.framinghamma.gov/3416/Geothermal-Pilot-Program. Accessed 27 Feb. 2024.
24. “UML Partners with Lowell, National Grid to Explore Renewable Energy.” UMass Lowell, www.uml.edu/
news/stories/2023/geothermal-pilot-project.aspx. Accessed 27 Feb. 2024.

66

4.2.  Transportation
The transportation sector encompasses all types of movement of people, goods, and services throughout the
region. In Greater Boston, the main modes of transportation are private vehicles, commercial vehicles, public
transit, cycling, and walking. Robust and equitable transportation and mobility networks are critical for Greater
Boston residents to access the places where they live, work, and play.
GHG emissions from the transportation
sector largely result from combustion of
fossil fuels in passenger, commercial,
and public vehicles. Fuel combustion
also results in harmful air pollutants,
such as particulate matter (PM) and
carbon monoxide (CO), which lead
to adverse human health effects
such as asthma. Decades of urban
segregation and highway expansion in
the region have resulted in higher rates
of exposure to traffic-related pollution
and related health impacts in lowincome communities and communities
of color.25 The map in Figure 15 shows
the traffic proximity across the region,
which closely aligns with the map of
LIDAC communities.

Figure 19: Percentage of transportation
emissions by subsector in 2017.

Transportation is the second highest
emitting sector in Greater Boston,
responsible for approximately
37 percent of the region’s total
emissions. As Figure 19 shows,
passenger vehicles are responsible for
most transportation-related emissions.

The priority transportation measures in this plan aim to
reduce emissions from passenger vehicles through two key
mechanisms:
(T1, T2) shifting trips away from private vehicles and toward
alternative, cleaner modes of transportation, and
(T3, T4) converting fossil fuel-powered vehicles to electric vehicles
and building out charging infrastructure.

67

Transportation
T1. Public Transit Access and Affordability
Public transit access and affordability are key equity and climate issues in Greater Boston.
The Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority (MBTA) and nine Regional Transit Agencies (RTAs)
provide critical public transit across Greater Boston via bus, subway, light rail, commuter rail, and
ferry.26 Improving public transit reduces reliance on private vehicles, which currently account for
approximately 85 Percent of transportation-related emissions, and enables the development of
healthier, walkable communities with denser housing development.
Expanding and improving public transit access and service in communities that are currently
underserved or not served at all provides vital access to resources, services, and economic
opportunities, while reducing the transportation cost burden for those who need it most. Public
transit must also be affordable and accessible to all residents. Buses disproportionately serve
minority and low-income riders.27 Reducing bus fares and improving bus service will therefore
primarily benefit people of color, low-income households, and people without cars or micro-mobility
options (i.e., bikes, e-bikes, bike share, scooters).
Municipalities, the MBTA, and RTAs in Greater Boston should:
1.	 Improve public transit service throughout Greater Boston by advocating for and funding
the extension of key and feeder bus, light rail, and commuter rail routes, increasing the
frequency and run time of service, creating municipal transit services, and coordinating with
Transportation Management Associations (TMA) to expand services and fill gaps in transit
options.
2.	 Decarbonize and electrify bus transit while maintaining reliable service.
3.	 Increase frequency and reliability of buses by creating and expanding dedicated bus lanes,
transit signal priority, level boarding and other bus priority treatments, and improving driver
facilities.
4.	 Implement fare free or reduced fare routes and/or passes on key routes in underserved areas
served by the MBTA and RTAs within the MSA and determine which fare-free routes and route
groupings are most successful.
5.	 Make transit stops more accessible by implementing sidewalk improvements, benches, ramps,
elevators, shade structures, lighting, multi-lingual signage, safe cycling infrastructure, bicycle
storage, bike share stations, and restrooms.

Geographic Scope

The MBTA, RTAs, and municipal
partners should expand services
and introduce new and/or continue
existing free or reduced fare routes
and bus infrastructure improvements
and should prioritize areas that are
currently underserved or not served by
public transit.

GHG Emissions Reductions
134,298 to 268,596 MTCO2e/year
The estimated emissions reductions
reflect avoided passenger vehicle
gasoline usage from increased use of
public transportation. See Appendix B
for additional information.
68

Transportation
T1. Public Transit Access and Affordability
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Leads with Equity: Enables transportation self-sufficiency for frontline populations traditionally
more dependent on public transit such as the youth, seniors, people with disabilities, and people
of color.
• Reduces Cost of Living: Reduces transportation cost burdens.
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Improves local air quality by reducing
single occupancy vehicles and trips.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Improves economic opportunities by increasing access
to job centers, education, and other key institutions; Increases access to essential services;
Reduces overall commuting time for riders.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• MBTA and Regional Transit Authorities
• Municipalities
• Transportation Management Associations
• Non-profit and community-based organizations
• Massachusetts and New Hampshire legislatures and departments of transportation
• RPAs/RPCs

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1-2: Plan route expansion, infrastructure improvements, and fare free program
• Year 2: Obtain approval and funding
• Years 3+: Operate, evaluate, and continue making improvements

Metrics to Track Progress
• Ridership – rates of ridership, number of new riders, number of riders that take transit instead of
passenger vehicles
• Rider cost savings, boarding and transit times, reliability and variability improvements
• Increase in coverage/area served
• Percentage of population with access to 15-30 minute service

69

Transportation
T1. Public Transit Access and Affordability
Other Funding Available
• Federal: All Stations
Accessibility Program, Better
Utilizing Investments to
Leverage Development (BUILD)
Transportation Grants Program,
Capital Investments Grant Program,
Enhanced Mobility of Seniors and
Individuals with Disabilities, Low
or No Emissions Grant Program,
Mobility, Access and Transportation
Insecurity (MATI) Program, Public
Transportation Innovation Grant
• MA: Community Transit Grant
Program, Complete Streets
Program, Community Development
Block Grant, Regional Transit
Innovation Grant, Shared Streets
and Spaces Program, State
Transportation Improvement
Program (STIP)
• NH: Statewide Transportation
Improvement Program (STIP)

Examples of Success
in the Region
• Bus Rapid Transit: In City of
Boston, a dedicated bus lane runs
along the center of Columbus
Avenue.29 Within the City of Everett
there are bi-directional dedicated
bus lanes on Broadway during peak
commuting times serve 10,000
passengers30

Workforce Development
Opportunities

Workforce shortages are already a
barrier to operating existing routes,
which makes expanded service even
more difficult to implement.28 Training
programs, assistance obtaining
commercial driver’s licenses, more
accommodating work schedules,
and higher wages are needed to fill
workforce gaps.

Policy Priorities
• State and Federal: (1) Increase
funding and mandates for the
MBTA and Regional Transit Agency
(RTA) transit electrification; (2)
Substantially increase funding for
the MBTA and RTAs to address
maintenance backlogs, expand
routes, improve frequency, reliability,
and ridership, increase fleets, and
subsidize fares.
• Municipal: (1) Update zoning
codes to encourage transit-orienteddevelopment; (2) Implement public
transit priority on streets; (3) Utilize
resources to electrify RTA fleets;
(4) Implement walking and cycling
infrastructure to access stations/
stops.

• Fare Free Bus pilots and
Programs: Several regions have fare
free routes including in Merrimack
Valley31, Brockton32, and Boston33
70

Transportation
T2. Multi-Modal Transportation
Multi-modal transportation systems prioritize walking, biking, micro-mobility (i.e., e-bikes, bike
share, scooters) and public transit as the main modes of travelling to and from work, school,
home, recreation, and commercial centers. Non-vehicle mobility options that are safe, accessible,
and well-connected reduce car dependency, which leads to lower GHG emissions, and increase
community health and economic opportunity. Multi-modal transportation networks should be
planned at a regional scale to ensure people can move within and across the region to access jobs,
services, resources, and community.
Municipalities, RPAs/RPCs, and the MBTA and RTAs should work together to improve and
expand multi-modal transportation networks by:
1.	 Building, improving, and expanding infrastructure to support multi-modal transportation –
including, but not limited to sidewalks, ramps, crosswalks, protected bike lanes, multi-use paths
and trails, bike racks, benches, bikeshare facilities – at or near commercial and job centers,
schools, parks, bus and rail stations, and along key regional corridors.
2.	 Connecting the infrastructure to public or shared modes of transportation, including micromobility, ride-share services, and public transit stations with secure bike storage or the ability to
carry bikes onto public transit.
3.	 Educating communities about these alternate transit options through interactive maps and
other wayfinding tools, multi-lingual signs and instructions, and micro-mobility campaigns.

Geographic Scope

Multi-modal transportation can be
developed and expanded everywhere
in the region, but is particularly
important in denser areas, commercial
centers, near transit stops, along
key corridors and trails, and in
communities with low rates of car
ownership, sparse transit options, and
where safer infrastructure is needed.

GHG Emissions Reductions

2,166 to 4,332
MTCO2e/year
The estimated emissions reductions
reflect avoided passenger vehicle
gasoline usage from increased use of
pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure.
See Appendix B for additional
information.

71

Transportation
T2. Multi-Modal Transportation
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Leads with Equity: Enables transportation self-sufficiency for frontline populations traditionally
more dependent on public transit such as the youth, seniors, people with disabilities, and people
of color.
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Can improve mental health by reducing
anxiety associated with transportation needs and reducing social isolation; Contributes to
physical health through increased activity; Improves safety for all road users; Increases access to
recreation and opportunities for movement.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Improves economic opportunities by increasing access
to job centers, education, and other key institutions; Reduces overall commute time.
• Improves Community Resilience to Climate Impacts: Strengthens the connectivity of
communities and access to services and critical facilities.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipalities
• RPAs/RPCs
• RTAs and MBTA
• Community members and community-based organizations
• State agencies that own land, such as Massachusetts Department of Conservation and
Recreation, New Hampshire Department of Natural and Cultural Resources, and state
transportation agencies
• Private property owners

Implementation Timelines
• Years 1-2: Community engagement, planning studies, educational campaigns, micro-mobility
pilots/expansion
• Years 3-5: Infrastructure improvements

Metrics to Track Progress
• Miles of sidewalks, bike lanes, and trails installed and/or improved
• Number of bike/scooter/e-bike-share users

72

Transportation
T2. Multi-Modal Transportation
Other Funding Available
• Federal: Neighborhood Access and
Equity Grant Program, Safe Streets
and Roads for All (SS4A) Grant
Program, Advanced Transportation
Technologies and Innovative
Mobility Deployment, Congestion
Mitigation and Air Quality
Improvement (CMAQ) Program,
The Transportation Alternatives (TA)
Set-Aside, Rebuilding American
Infrastructure with Sustainability and
Equity (RAISE) Grant Program
• MA: Complete Streets Program,
Shared Streets and Spaces Grant
Program, Municipal Vulnerability and
Preparedness Program
• NH: Complete Streets Program
Cochituate Rail Trail in Framingham,
Massachusetts. Photo by Weston & Sampson

Examples of Success
in the Region
• Bruce Freeman Rail Trail: 25mile route that connects Lowell,
Chelmsford, Westford, Carlisle,
Action, Concord, Sudbury, and
Framingham.34
• Electric Blue Bikes: In 2023, the
bike share program launched ebikes
in Metro Boston with reduced pricing
for income eligible members.35 36
• Reimagine Broadway: City of
Everett and community partners
installed multilingual wayfinding and
mobility hubs alongside bus rapid
transit.37

Policy Priorities
• State and Federal: (1) Increase
funding for bike share programs and
infrastructure.
• Municipal: (1) Update zoning
codes to support transitoriented-development (increased
density near transit, mixed-use
requirements, transportation
demand management); (2) Remove
parking minimums and/or adopt
parking maximums; (3) Adopt and
enforce Complete Streets policies.

73

Transportation
T3. Electric Vehicle Affordability
Passenger vehicles are responsible for approximately 85 percent of the total emissions in the
region. One strategy to reduce emissions from personal vehicles is to transition to low emission
vehicles, including electric vehicles (EVs), plug-in-hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), extendedrange EVs, and mild hybrid EVs. A major barrier to switching to EVs from traditional internal
combustion engine (ICE) vehicles is the higher upfront cost of EVs, which presents a greater
burden for low- and moderate-income households. Moreover, due to the newness of the EV market,
there are limited options to purchase used vehicles, which are typically more affordable than new
vehicles.
State and federal governments offer incentives to reduce the cost of EVs, largely through tax
incentives and rebates, but these are often not enough to make the cost of EVs the same as ICE
vehicles.
To increase the affordability of EVs in the region, municipalities, RPAs/RPCs, and
community-based organizations should:
1.	 Create and support EV car share programs, prioritizing locations at or near affordable
multifamily housing and in neighborhoods that are underserved by public transit and lack
available off-street parking.
2.	 Expand technical and financial assistance programs to help residents and small businesses
purchase EVs, including deeper vehicle subsidies, especially for low- and moderate-income
residents, alternatives to rebates and tax credits, and low-cost financing.
3.	 Support the growth of a used EV market through platforms that help residents find used EVs,
as well as subsidies and financial assistance for used EVs, including battery refurbishment and
repair.
4.	 Explore group purchasing opportunities for municipalities and residents to purchase EVs at
lower negotiated prices.
5.	 Educate vehicle buyers and sellers about EVs, EV charging, the benefits of EVs, and available
incentives.

Geographic Scope

GHG Emissions Reductions

These programs can be implemented
throughout Greater Boston, but priority
should be given to neighborhoods in
LIDAC communities and where public
transit is non-existent, not accessible,
or insufficient.

269,427 to 538,854 MTCO2e/year
The estimated emissions reductions
reflect a portion of the MA vehicle
electrification goals. See Appendix B
for additional information.

74

Transportation
T3. Electric Vehicle Affordability
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Leads with Equity: Provides benefits that focus on low- and moderate-income households.
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Improves outdoor air quality.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Reduces the transportation cost burden; Expands
access to economic opportunities and services that are only accessible by car.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipalities
• RPAs/RPCs
• Education institutions and job training centers
• Community-based organizations and non-profits
• Car dealers, banks and financiers, tax preparers
• EV Carshare organizations and companies
• Affordable housing developers and owners

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1: Plan EV car share networks and programs, plan financial and technical assistance
programs and education campaigns, start organizing bulk buy program
• Years 2+: Build out EV car share locations, roll out financial and technical assistance programs
and education campaigns, pilot bulk buy program

Metrics to Track Progress
• Number of EVs purchased or leased by low- to moderate-income households
• Average cost of EV after incentives/subsidies
• Number of car share locations in LIDAC neighborhoods and neighborhoods unserved or
underserved by transit
• Number of unique drivers using shared vehicles and number of bookings

75

Transportation
T3. Electric Vehicle Affordability
Other Funding Available
• Federal: Tax Credits for New
Clean Vehicles, Alternative Fuel
Infrastructure Tax Credit
• MA: MOR-EV Rebate Program

Workforce Development
Opportunities
Mechanics and auto technicians must
be trained in EV repair for a variety of
vehicle types. Programs, such as the
Benjamin Franklin Cummings Institute
of Technology EV Repair Program,38
can be expanded across technical
colleges and vocational schools.

Examples of Success
in the Region
• Car Share: Good2Go is a nonprofit that operates ten vehicles
at seven car share locations in
Boston39; Good2Go also operates
an Ambassador Program, which
matches community members to
drive seniors, disabled, or unlicensed
neighbors in exchange for driving
credits.40
• EV Education: Recharge MA hosts
EV test drive events at workplaces,
universities, and community events41,
Drive Electric NH hosts educational
events and expos42, Gloucester
community dinners exploring the
opportunities and challenges of
purchasing and leasing EVs.

Policy Priorities
• State and Federal: (1) Increase
subsidies for EVs for low-income
households and small businesses;
(2) Improve communication about
programs with consumers to
encourage greater uptake of EVs
and use of programs.

• EV Incentives: Massachusetts’
MOR-EV program offers rebates up
to $4,500 for lease or purchase of a
new or used EV. Income qualifying
applicants are eligible to receive an
additional $1,500 rebate for the lease
or purchase of a new or used EV.43

76

Transportation
T4. Electric Vehicle Charging
Sparse charging infrastructure is a major barrier to widespread adoption of electric vehicles (EVs).
The ability to charge EVs is particularly limited for renters, residents of multifamily buildings, and
residents who do not have dedicated or off-street parking spaces. To adopt EVs, these residents
need guaranteed access to public, convenient, and affordable charging options near their homes
and workplaces.
Municipalities and RPAs/RPCs in Greater Boston should:
1.	 Develop a regional EV charging network strategy, with a focus on public, curbside, overnight
charging, particularly near multifamily housing and commercial centers. Work with electric
vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) companies and utilities to build and operate the charging
infrastructure.
2.	 Explore EV charging incentives and cost reduction programs to make charging equitable and
accessible to low-to-moderate-income drivers and renters, such as reduced electricity rates,
free charging at affordable housing sites, or pre-paid debit cards for charging stations.
3.	 Educate residents about how to use EV chargers and clearly communicate the rules and
guidelines for using public chargers.

Geographic Scope
EV charging infrastructure is
particularly important where off-street
parking is limited, in neighborhoods
with high proportions of renters and/
or limited transit access, and in
commercial centers. Municipalities
and RPAs/RPCs should identify and
prioritize building public charging
infrastructure in these areas.

GHG Emissions Reductions

65,936 to 131,873
MTCO2e/year

The estimated emissions reductions
are based on electrification of a portion
of the vehicles owned by people living
in multifamily buildings of 3 or more
units. See Appendix B for additional
information.

77

Transportation
T4. Electric Vehicle Charging
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Leads with Equity: Decreases the barriers to owning an EV.
• Reduces Cost of Living: Can reduce transportation cost burden.
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Improves outdoor air quality.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Provides job opportunities for electricians and
contractors installing EVSE.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipalities
• RPAs/RPCs
• Public and affordable housing owners and developers
• Private property owners
• Electricians and installers
• Utilities

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1-2 – Conduct outreach to plan charging station locations and contract with EVSE
companies
• Years 3+ – EVSE companies build out and operate charging infrastructure, municipalities pilot
charging cost reduction programs

Metrics to Track Progress
• Number of public charging stations
• Number of charging sessions at public charging stations
• Number of EVs owned or leased by renters or residents of multifamily buildings

78

Transportation
T4. Electric Vehicle Charging
Other Funding Available
• Federal: Charging and Fueling
Infrastructure Grant Program,
Energy Storage Demonstration and
Pilot Grant Program, Advanced
Transportation Technologies and
Innovative Mobility Deployment,
National Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Formula Program,
Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality
Improvement (CMAQ) Program,
Transportation Infrastructure
Financing and Innovation Act (TIFIA)
• MA: Community Compact Program,
MassEVIP Public Access Charging
Incentives

Examples of Success
in the Region
• Curbside Charging: Melrose
installed pole-mounted EV chargers
throughout the city45; Cambridge
has a pilot permit program to allow
residents who do not have access
to off-street parking to charge EVs
across an authorized sidewalk area.46
• EV Charging Installation
Trainings: Benjamin Franklin
Cummings Institute of Technology,
MassBay Community College, and
the Automotive Career Development
Center (ACDC) offer relevant EV
programs.

Workforce Development
Opportunities

Building and maintaining public
charging infrastructure requires
licensed electricians. Existing
electrician training programs should
integrate EVSE training and new
programs should be developed to
train electricians to build, operate,
and maintain charging stations.
Public charging stations should
include project labor agreements
and work with unions to build a
pipeline of qualified electricians
who have successfully completed
the Electric Infrastructure Training
Vehicle Program to serve the growing
EV charging needs of the region.44

Policy Priorities
• State: (1) Adopt time-of-use (TOU)
rates for vehicle charging with equity
structure; (2) Remove restrictions
on pole-mounted charging; (e)
Streamline procurement for
construction and servicing of EVSE.
• Municipal: (a) Adopt local
ordinance that defines the terms
and requirements associated with
EV charging across public right of
way; (2) Streamline permitting and
inspections for EVSE installation
aligned with the building and
electrical codes; (3) Set deployment
goals at priority locations for
equitable on-street charging.

79

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

25. “Cars, Trucks, Buses and Air Pollution.” Union of Concerned Scientists, Updated 2023, https://www.
ucsusa.org/resources/cars-trucks-buses-and-air-pollution#.XAqcu2hKiUm.
26. “Public Transportation in Massachusetts.” Massachusetts Department of Transportation, https://www.
mass.gov/info-details/public-transportation-in-massachusetts.
27. “Potential MBTA Fare Changes in SFY 2020.” Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, 2019, https://
cdn.mbta.com/sites/default/files/fares/fare-proposal-2019/equity-anlaysis-sfy20-fare-changesmarch2019-FINAL.pdf.
28. MilNeil, Christian. “The MBTA’s Bus Driver Shortage Is Getting Even Worse.” Streetsblog Massachusetts,
19 January 2023, https://mass.streetsblog.org/2023/01/19/the-mbtas-bus-driver-shortage-is-gettingeven-worse.
29. “Columbus Avenue Bus Lanes.” Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, https://www.mbta.com/
projects/columbus-avenue-bus-lanes.
30. “EverettBRT.” BostonBRT, https://www.bostonbrt.org/everettbrt-new-1.
31. Katcher, Will. “Merrimack Valley Buses Begin 2 Years of Free Fare Tuesday, ‘a Game-Changer’ for Riders,
Officials Say.” MassLive, 1 Mar. 2022, https://www.masslive.com/news/2022/03/merrimack-valley-busesbegin-2-years-of-free-fare-tuesday-a-game-changer-for-riders-officials-say.html.
32. “Bat Offers 6 Months Free Service Starting December 1st.” Brockton Area Transit Authority, 29 Nov. 2023,
https://www.ridebat.com/bat-offers-6-months-free-service-starting-december-1st/.
33. “Free Route 23, 28, and 29 Bus Program.” Boston.Gov, 2 July 2021, www.boston.gov/departments/
transportation/free-route-23-28-and-29-bus-program#:~:text=Who%20is%20paying%20for%20
all,lost%20fares%20on%20these%20routes.
34. “Visit the Trail.” Friends of the Bruce Freeman Rail Trail, 27 June 2023, https://brucefreemanrailtrail.org/.
35. “Meet the Ebike.” BLUEbikes, https://bluebikes.com/how-it-works/meet-the-ebike.
36. ”Ebikes in Bluebikes: Bluebikes now has ebikes, allowing riders to go further while working less” City of
Boston. https://www.boston.gov/departments/transportation/ebikes-bluebikes
37. “Reimagine Broadway: The Everett Transportation Revolution.” BostonBRT, https://www.bostonbrt.org/
everett-brt-page.

80

38. “Electric Vehicle Technology Concentration.” Franklin Cummings Tech, https://franklincummings.edu/
academics/academic-programs/electric-vehicle-technology/.
39. “Who are we?” Good2Go, https://evgood2go.org/about/.
40. “Impact Report 2023.” Good2Go, 2023, https://evgood2go.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/Good2GoImpact-Report-2023.pdf.
41. “Recharge Massachusetts.” Recharge Massachusetts, https://www.recharge-massachusetts.org/.
42. Home.” DriveelectricNH, www.driveelectricnh.org/. Accessed 22 Feb. 2024.
43. “Electric Vehicles for Everyone.” Massachusetts Offers Rebates for Electric Vehicles (MOR-EV), https://
mor-ev.org/about.
44. “Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Training Program (EVITP).” EVITP, https://evitp.org/.
45. “City of Melrose Introduces Innovative Electric Vehicle Charger Program.” Melrose MA, 22 Apr. 2021, www.
cityofmelrose.org/home/news/city-melrose-introduces-innovative-electric-vehicle-charger-program.
46. “Electric Vehicles.” City Seal of Cambridge, www.cambridgema.gov/Departments/
communitydevelopment/evchargingstations. Accessed 27 Feb. 2024.

81

4.3.  Electricity Generation
Electricity generation emissions in the Greater Boston MSA come primarily from the combustion of fossil fuels
like natural gas and oil, as well as other sources like waste-to-energy incinerators, biomass, and landfill gas.
Generation sources include those within the region and sources that power the regional ISO-New England
grid. Much of the power consumed in the MSA is imported from elsewhere in the Northeast. Over 95 percent of
emissions from this sector come from electricity consumed in residential, commercial, and industrial buildings,
with the remainder used to power electric vehicles (EVs) and rail transit.

(Transmission & Distribution)

Figure 20: Proportion of kWh Usage by Electric Utilities and Programs in 2017 in Greater Boston.
Across the region, most electricity is supplied by Investor-Owned Utilities (IOUs). Renewable Portfolio Standard
(RPS) policies and other standards establish renewable electricity generation requirements for electricity
sold that increase annually. While the RPS varies between New Hampshire and Massachusetts, in 2017 the
requirements were less than 20 percent of sales.47 Since 2017, both states have greatly increased requirements,
established new standards, and broadened eligible technologies. In 2023, the New Hampshire RPS obligation
was 24.3 percent (including 14.1 percent Class I RECs), and the Massachusetts combined new Clean Energy
Standard (CES) and RPS obligation was 35.2 percent (including 22 percent Class I RECs).48 49 Electricity
supplied through community choice aggregation programs must comply with all standards that apply to IOUs.
While not subject to the RPS, in Massachusetts, the Next Generation Climate Roadmap bill does require
municipal light plants to supply 50 percent of its electricity from non-carbon emitting sources by 2030 and to be
net zero by 2050.50 In 2017, municipal utilities reported that anywhere from 8 percent to over 85 percent of their
electricity came from renewable energy sources.51

82

Solar, photo from Adobe Stock

Renewable electricity generation is accounted for using Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs). One REC is
created when an eligible renewable energy source generates one megawatt-hour (MWh) of electricity for the
grid. A REC represents the environmental (e.g. non-energy) benefits of the energy generated. MA Class I RECs
are from commercial renewable energy operations built after 1997 in New England that generate electricity
using solar photovoltaic, solar thermal electric, wind energy, small hydropower, landfill methane and anerobic
digester gas, marine or hydrokinetic energy, geothermal energy, and eligible biomass fuel.52 Most entities within
the Greater Boston region purchase Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) from sources outside the MSA for a
significant portion of their renewable energy.53
Electricity Generation is the third highest emitting sector in Greater Boston, responsible for
approximately 19 percent of the region’s total emissions. Decarbonizing electricity generation is critical
to not just reducing GHG emissions from generation, but also enabling building and vehicle owners to
transition off fossil fuel combustion by using appliances and vehicles powered by low-carbon electricity.

The priority electricity generation measures
aim to reduce emissions by:
(E1) Developing renewable energy projects, and
(E2) adopting municipal aggregation.

83

Energy Generation
E1. Develop Renewable Energy Projects
Deployment of renewable energy projects has expanded rapidly over the past decade, with nearly
four gigawatts of new solar PV installed in Massachusetts and New Hampshire from 2013-2023.
However, barriers remain to enabling further deployment of renewable energy projects, specifically
community shared solar (CSS), energy storage, and microgrids. Ensuring that the benefits of
solar and renewable energy technologies are accessible to a diverse range of residents, including
renters, people of color, and low-and-moderate income households has remained challenging.
As with siting any new energy infrastructure, medium- and large-scale renewable energy projects
should aim to protect cultural heritage and sacred sites, maintain green and open space, and
mitigate impacts and risks, particularly to LIDAC communities. Municipalities must also balance
these concerns in the development process by communicating key needs and requirements
to developers and project partners to ensure projects can be developed efficiently. When
municipalities are project partners or owners, they are better able to integrate community benefits
and engagement into development processes, such as by establishing Community Benefits
Agreements or requiring program shares for low-moderate income residents.
Municipalities, MLPs, and RPAs/RPCs should:
1.	 Expand access to community shared solar projects and benefits by leasing public land
(including capped landfills, brownfields, under-utilized plots, parking lots, or municipal rooftops)
and require affordable or no-cost shares local low-income subscribers.
2.	 Serve as anchor off-takers for community shared solar projects or microgrids to help establish
new projects.
3.	 Increase deployment of solar and solar plus storage projects through municipal ownership and
public-private partnerships.
4.	 Provide technical assistance, capacity, and support to municipalities to reduce barriers to
renewable energy development including streamlining zoning and permitting, accessing
incentives and financing, and training and education for municipal staff.

Geographic Scope

GHG Emissions Reductions

The actions in this measure can
be implemented across the MSA,
although location-specific siting
analysis will be needed to better
understand solar potential, land
use concerns, and interconnection
and grid capacity constraints and
opportunities.54

The estimated emissions reductions
were calculated based on the average
percent increase in total community
solar capacity in the MA portion of the
MSA. See Appendix B for additional
information.

206,160 to 269,049
MTCO2e/year

84

Energy Generation
E1. Develop Renewable Energy Projects
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Reduces Cost of Living: Community shared solar can lower household energy bills.
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Opportunity to utilize brownfields and
remediate contaminated sites. Reduced outdoor air pollution as renewable energy projects offset
natural gas generation.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Job opportunities for solar installers, electricians, and
related services.
• Improves Community Resilience to Climate Impacts: Battery storage and smart inverters
can be designed to island buildings during a grid outage and pair with emergency back-up power,
particularly critical community facilities.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipalities and Municipal Light Plants
• RPAs/RPCs
• Solar developers and installers; solar financers and lenders; community shared solar companies
• Utilities
• Non-profits and community-based organizations
• State agencies including Mass Clean Energy Center, Massachusetts Department of Energy
Resources, New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1-2: Project scoping, design and engineering, financing/funding, and permitting.
• Year 2-4: Project construction
• Year 3-5: Project commissioning and operation
Note: Phases of the project depend on the complexity of the project.

Metrics to Track Progress
• MW of new solar developed
• MW of battery storage deployed
• Number of residents/customers served by community share solar
• Number of income-eligible customers served
• Energy bill savings delivered to income-eligible customers

85

Energy Generation
E1. Develop Renewable Energy Projects
Other Funding Available
• Federal: Energy Storage
Demonstration and Pilot Grant
Program, Solar for All, Inflation
Reduction Act Programs
• MA: Community Compact,
Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness
• NH: Renewable Energy Fund,
Residential Renewable Electrical
Generation Program, Commercial
and Industrial Solar Incentive
Program

Examples of Success
in the Region
• Chelsea Community Microgrid:
the City is working with community
partners to develop a virtual
microgrid55
• Acton Boxborough Regional
School District: Douglas and Gates
Elementary School achieved net zero
with an Energy Intensity Unit (EUI) of
23. This project includes solar plus
storage and geothermal.56

Workforce Development
Opportunities
Renewable energy installation can
provide jobs to solar installers,
electricians, and related services.
Municipal-led or partnership projects
can require or promote local workforce
hiring, apprenticeship programs,
prevailing wage requirements, and
utilizing minority and women owned
business in procuring renewable
energy contractors through project
labor agreements.

Policy Priorities
• State: (1) Provide technical support
to navigate interconnection approval
processes and infrastructure
upgrades; (2) Continue exploring
approaches to make distributed
generation interconnection-related
upgrades proactively and allocate
costs across project developers and
load customers (i.e., MA’s Capital
Investment Program57); (3) Allow
for on-bill programs or bill credits to
make community shared solar more
accessible and straightforward for
customers.

86

Energy Generation
E2. Adopt Municipal Aggregation
In Massachusetts and New Hampshire, the electricity supply market is deregulated and enables
municipalities to act as electricity suppliers to procure electricity on behalf of local residences and
businesses. When municipal aggregation programs58 are established, customers on basic service
from an IOU and not already under contract with another third-party supplier are automatically
enrolled. Most residential and small commercial customers enrolled in aggregation programs
stay with the default offering rather than opt out. Larger commercial entities often have separate
competitive electricity supply contracts.
Electricity supplied through municipal aggregation programs must comply with renewable
electricity standards (e.g. Renewable Portfolio Standards, Clean Energy Standards), and programs
typically offer opportunities to optionally enroll residents and businesses in products that exceed
state renewable energy requirements with differing percentages of renewables (e.g. minimum
requirements, 100 percent Class I renewables).59 By increasing renewables used in the default
supply, municipalities can significantly increase renewable electricity usage across the community,
putting communities on a path towards 100 percent renewable electricity more rapidly than
required under the laws of both states. While most programs serve one municipality, a regional
approach that serves multiple municipalities is also an option. The first aggregation program in the
country, Cape Light Compact, was established in 1997 to serve 21 towns on Cape Cod, Martha’s
Vineyard, and Dukes County.60
Though municipal aggregation programs are not guaranteed to deliver cost savings relative to
utility-provided electricity supply, over the past five years, municipal aggregation programs with
higher renewable electricity content on average delivered savings relative to basic service.61
Municipalities should consider developing program structures that provide support to low- and
moderate-income customers and ensure that the program offers opt-in pricing tiers equivalent to
basic service to ensure affordability and mitigate potential cost increases to residents with high
energy burdens.
Municipalities, along with support from RPAs/RPCs, should:
1.	 Establish and adopt new programs in their communities, if they do not yet participate, with
support from their RPA/RPC or non-profit organizations. Municipalities can evaluate default
products with higher renewable electricity content than required under the RPS.
2.	 Work with their aggregation broker to increase the percentage of Class I RECs in their default program
offering over time and develop a pathway towards to 100 percent renewable electricity by 2030.

Geographic Scope

This strategy applies to every
municipality in the MSA that is served
by an IOU.62 Municipalities served
by municipal light plants do not
participate in aggregation programs
but can choose to source up to 100
percent of its electricity supply from
renewable sources.

GHG Emissions Reductions

Residential: 910,169 to 1,441,100
MTCO2e/year
Commercial: 1,006,074 to 1,341,431
MTCO2e/year
The estimated emissions reductions
are based on an increase in municipal
aggregation in 63 communities. See
Appendix B for additional information.

Energy Generation
E2. Adopt Municipal Aggregation
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Reduces Cost of Living: Reduces energy bills when programs can offer better rates than utility
basic service; Reduces energy insecurity for vulnerable residents by providing stable prices with
longer contract terms.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipal governments (City Council or Town Meeting approval is required)
• Counties (New Hampshire only)
• RPAs/RPCs
• Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities (DPU) and New Hampshire Public Utilities
Commission (PUC)
• Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources and New Hampshire Department of Energy

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1: Conduct initial research on aggregation, authorize program development at city council/
town meeting, solicit an energy broker to support program implementation, develop aggregation
plan and approve internally.
• Year 2: Submit aggregation plan to DPU or PUC for review
• Year 2-3+: Upon approval, issue a request for proposals (RFP) for competitive supplier, execute
supply contract, conduct outreach to notify customers around program, and begin automatic
enrollment
• Future years: review metrics and benefits delivered to-date, explore opportunity to increase
share of renewables in default option.

Metrics to Track Progress
• New municipalities begin municipal aggregation by 2030
• Municipalities offer default program options with 100 percent renewable electricity supply by
2030
• Municipalities that provide support for low-income customers

88

Energy Generation
E2. Adopt Municipal Aggregation
Other Funding Available
• Municipal aggregation programs
do not have a direct cost for
municipalities beyond the staff
time needed to start a program.
Brokers who run the programs for
municipalities are paid by suppliers
via a small surcharge, typical $0.001
per kWh of electricity consumed in
the program.

Examples of Success
in the Region
• As of 2023, over 167 municipalities
in Massachusetts have established
municipal aggregation programs
(out of 302 served by an IOU), 54
of which have default options that
have 5 percent more renewable
electricity than required under the
RPS.63 Several of these communities
already have aggregation programs
that source over 80 percent of
electricity from renewables. Two
New Hampshire municipalities
are developing community choice
aggregation programs.

Solar panels. Photo by Weston & Sampson

Policy Priorities
• State: (1) Pass legislation to end
third party predatory energy supply
contracts66; (2) Streamline the
process and approval time for new
municipal aggregation programs and
changes to existing programs.

• Boston Community Choice
Electricity: is the largest program in
Massachusetts, with a default option
that includes 39 percent renewable
energy, with an option to opt-up
to 100 percent renewable energy
sourced from New England area.64
• Nashua Region Electricity Supply
Aggregation: has been in place
since 2012 which includes nine
municipalities and six school
districts.65
89

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

47. “Massachusetts Minimum Standards Through 2030.” Department of Energy Resources, Revised 2023,
https://www.mass.gov/doc/ma-minimum-standards-through-2030/download; “Renewable Portfolio
Standard.” New Hampshire Department of Energy, https://www.energy.nh.gov/renewable-energy/
renewable-portfolio-standard.
48. ”Program Summaries: Summaries of all the Renewable and Alternative Energy Portfolio Standard
programs”. Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources. https://www.mass.gov/info-details/programsummaries
49. ”Renewable Portfolio Standard”. New Hampshire Department of Energy. https://www.energy.nh.gov/
renewable-energy/renewable-portfolio-standard
50. ”Next-Generation Roadmap Bill: What You Need to Know” Metropolitan Area Planning Council.
https://www.mapc.org/planning101/climate-roadmap-bill-signed-into-law-heres-oursummary/#:~:text=Codifies%20the%20target%20of%20net,at%20five%2Dyear%20increments.
51. Municipal light plant data is included in the 2017 GHG inventory and can be found in the Appendix- GHG
Methodology Description and Summary by Sector; ”MassDEP GHG Reporting Program Summary Report
for Retail Sellers of Electricity Emissions Year 2017”. 2019. https://www.mass.gov/doc/2017-summarymassachusetts-ghg-emissions-reports-for-retail-sellers-of-electricity/download.
52. ”Program Summaries: Summaries of all the Renewable and Alternative Energy Portfolio Standard
programs” MA Department of Energy Resources. https://www.mass.gov/info-details/program-summaries
53. Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources. (2023). 2021 Annual Compliance Report. https://www.
mass.gov/doc/rps-aps-2021-annual-compliance-report-final-draft-11-28-23/download
54. In Massachusetts, the recent Technical Potential of Solar Study may provide valuable guidance to
municipalities and regional planning agencies. “Technical Potential of Solar Study” Department of Energy
Resources. https://www.mass.gov/info-details/technical-potential-of-solar-study
55. “Community Microgrid.” City of Chelsea, Massachusetts, https://www.chelseama.gov/community/
community_microgrid.php.
56. “Solar Projects.” Acton-Boxborough Regional School District, https://www.abschools.org/district/
facilities___transportation/solar_projects. “Demystifying Net Zero Virtual Event Featured School Projects’
Description.” Massachusetts School Building Authority, https://www.massschoolbuildings.org/sites/
default/files/edit-contentfiles/Programs/Story_Of_A_Building/May_2021/Demystifying%20Net%20
Zero%20-%20School%20Project%20Descriptions.pdf.

90

57. Investigation by the Department of Public Utilities On its Own Motion Into Electric Distribution
Companies’ (1) Distributed Energy Resource Planning and (2) Assignment and Recovery of Costs for the
Interconnection of Distributed Generation. MA Dept. of Public Utilities Docket 20-75 (pending).
58. Also referred to as Community Choice Aggregation (CCA), Community Power Aggregation, or Community
Choice Electricity.
59. Additional information on municipal aggregation in Massachusetts can be found here: https://www.mapc.
org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/MAPC-Green-Municipal-Aggregation-Toolkit_2020-Update.pdf
60. “Serving Cape Cod and Martha’s Vineyard for Over 20 Years.” Cape Light Compact, https://www.
capelightcompact.org/about-us/.
61. Chretien, Larry, and Mikaela Hondros-McCarthy. “Green Power at Lower Cost.” Green Energy Consumers,
2023, https://260434.fs1.hubspotusercontent-na1.net/hubfs/260434/GMA%20Report%202023%20
-%20Final.pdf.
62. This includes the seven New Hampshire communities served by the New Hampshire Electric Co-op.
63. Chretien, Larry, and Mikaela Hondros-McCarthy. “Green Power at Lower Cost.” Green Energy Consumers,
2023, https://260434.fs1.hubspotusercontent-na1.net/hubfs/260434/GMA%20Report%202023%20
-%20Final.pdf.
64. “Boston Community Choice Electricity.” Boston.Gov, 26 Feb. 2019, www.boston.gov/departments/
environment/community-choice-electricity.
65. “Energy Aggregation” Nashua Regional Planning Commission. https://www.nashuarpc.org/energy___
environment/energy_aggregation.php
66. Baldwin, Susan M, and Timothy E Howington. “Consumers Continue to Lose Big: The 2023 Update to
An Analysis of the Individual Residential Electric Supply Market in Massachusetts.” State Impact Center,
Massachusetts Attorney General’s Office, 2023, https://stateimpactcenter.org/files/AGActions_MarketStudy-2023-Update.pdf.

91

4.4.  Waste Measures
The collection, processing, and disposal of waste accounts for 5 percent of Greater Boston’s GHG
emissions. As shown in Figure 21, solid waste disposal accounts for 85 percent of emissions, followed by
wastewater treatment and discharge at 12 percent, 3 percent to incineration and open burning. Emissions
generated through waste-to-energy incineration within the boundary of the MSA are included in the electricity
generation sector and not in the waste sector of the GHG Inventory.67 In 2017 approximately 4,000,000 tons of
waste were disposed in the region, equal to an average of 0.8 tons, or 1,600 pounds, per person annually. Almost
80 percent of all waste was disposed within the region. Just under 36,000 tons (less than 1 percent of the total
waste) were composted.

Figure 21: GHG Emissions from the Waste Sector in 2017.
Note that biological treatment of waste includes composting and anaerobic digestion and emissions
generated by waste-to-energy incineration are included in the electricity generation sector.

Although waste makes up a small percentage of overall
GHG emissions, processing solid waste emits other harmful
pollutants such as nitrous oxide (NOx), carbon monoxide
(CO), methane, particulate matter and fly ash, heavy metals,
PFAS, and dioxins into local air and waterways. Due to limited
land fill capacity, Massachusetts burns more household
waste per capita than any other state and has the third highest
number of waste incinerators.69 As shown in Figure 22, there
are three waste combustion facilities within the region that are
located near Environmental Justice communities (Haverhill
Resource Recovery Facility, Wheelabrator North Andover, and
Wheelabrator Saugus).70 Also, waste transportation contributed
to heavy-duty vehicle emissions within communities receiving
waste.71

Figure 22: Three waste-to-energy
incinerators are in the Greater Boston
MSA, including Saugus, Haverhill, and
North Andover.68

92

Waste, photo from Adobe Stock

In 2021, the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) released the 2030 Solid Waste
Master Plan for the Commonwealth. It set a state-wide goal of reducing solid waste disposal by 30 percent by
2030, and 90 percent by 2050.72 In 2022, the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (DES)
adopted its Solid Waste Management Plan, with mandates from the state’s General Court to reduce disposal
of municipal solid waste and construction and demolition debris 25 percent by 2030 and 45 percent by 2050.73
Several local governments have also adopted zero waste plans or include waste in their Climate Action Plans.

The priority waste measure focuses on
reducing GHG emissions and harmful
pollutants by:
(W1) reducing solid waste going to landfills
and incinerators.

93

Waste
W1. Reduce Solid Waste Going to Landfills and Incinerators
Support municipal implementation and regionalization of programs and infrastructure that divert
solid waste, including organic waste and recyclables, from landfills and incinerators. Solid waste
disposal and single-stream recycling is increasingly expensive for municipalities and can be
confusing for residents. Multi-municipal or regional solutions to establish or expand composting,
material reuse and repair programs, and improve recycling will be critical to reducing solid waste.
At the same time, municipalities can use education and policies to reduce consumption and
encourage reuse and recycling of materials. Local government can help support both states in
meeting their waste reduction goals, as well as educating residents and enforcing existing waste
disposal bans74 and assisting residents with alternatives that comply with state regulations.
Municipalities, RPAs/RPCs, and the states should work together to:
1.	 Expand existing sites and establish new regional composting sites that can serve more
customers for curbside and institutional composting. Municipalities may explore public-private
partnerships or lease public land to support composting sites.
2.	 Explore and encourage municipal collaboration and shared services on solid waste disposal
and recycling procurement to achieve better outcomes and economies of scale. Ensure that
vendors can recycle significant amounts of what is collected and pair with consumer education
and outreach programs to increase participation and reduce consumption.
3.	 Enforce state and local waste bans and regional programs to support responsible recycling of
textiles, mattresses, and other materials banned from landfills.
4.	 Develop local government procurement requirements and sustainable purchasing policies and
mandates to support solid waste reduction goals.
5.	 Partner with non-profits, schools, and libraries to establish a variety of waste diversion
programs including re-use and repair programs, textile donations and recycling, and library of
things projects.

Geographic Scope
The actions within this measure can
be implemented across the region.

GHG Emissions Reductions

36,967 to 55,450
MTCO2e/year
The estimated emissions reductions
are based on goals in MA 2030 Solid
Waste Master Plan. See Appendix B for
additional information.

94

Waste
W1. Reduce Solid Waste Going to Landfills and Incinerators
LIDAC Benefits Analysis
• Reduces Environmental and Public Health Burdens: Reduces emissions from co-pollutants,
such as such as volatile organic compounds (VOCs), hazardous air pollutants (HAPs), and
other air toxics that can endanger the physical and mental health of residents near landfills or
incinerators. May reduce the transportation emissions associated with waste collection.
• Creates Economic and Job Benefits: Can reduce waste disposal costs for municipalities and
consumers; New composting programs can provide economic opportunities.

Implementing Agencies and Partners
• Municipal Government
• Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (MADEP) or New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services (NHDES)
• Waste haulers, compost service providers, non-profits
• RPAs/RPCs

Implementation Timelines
• Year 1-2: Regional planning and project scoping for composing site, planning and contract
bidding and negotiation for regional recycling contracts
• Year 2-3: Design and engineering, financing/funding, and permitting of new composting sites as
applicable.
• Year 3-4: Construction and implementation
Note: Phases of the project depend on the complexity of the specific project.

Metrics to Track Progress
• Tons of organic waste diverted from landfills and incinerators
• Tons of organic waste composted
• Tons of waste recycled and/or reused

95

Waste
W1. Reduce Solid Waste Going to Landfills and Incinerators
Other Funding Available
• Federal: Solid Waste Infrastructure
Recycling Program; Consumer
Recycling Education and Outreach
Program
• MA: Efficiency and Regionalization
Grant Program; Sustainable
Materials Recovery Program
(SMRP) Municipal Grants; SMRP
Recycling Dividends Program
(RDP); Reduce, Reuse, Repair
Micro-Grants; Recycling and Reuse
Business Development Grants.

Workforce Development
Opportunities
Composting, recycling, and repair
programs can create more jobs than
waste incinerations and landfills on
a per 10,000 ton basis.75 New and
expanded services and programs can
create local jobs, and municipal-led or
partnership programs can establish
requirements for local hiring and
community benefits agreements.

• NH: Unlined Municipal Landfill and
Incinerator Closure Grant Program;
Municipal Recycling and Storage
Equipment Grants.

Examples of Success
in the Region
• Curbside composting: Many
municipalities offer curbside
composting through public-private
partnerships, private composting
haulers, or local non-profits including
Salem, Lexington, Natick, Hamilton,
Nashua, and the Seacoast of New
Hampshire.

Policy Priorities
• State and Federal: (1) Implement
state solid waste plans and goals
through sufficient budgeting for
enforcement and technical and
financial assistance for local
governments and community
education; (2) Expand Extended
Producer Responsibility (EPR)
policies and other fee structures for
disposables (i.e., mattresses, paint,
electronics, bottling, and consumer
packaging).
• Municipal: (1) Adopt local policies
that reduce waste (i.e., limit singleuse plastics, regulate disposal of
building and construction waste).

96

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

67. For more information on emissions calculations please see the Appendix: GHG Methodology Description
and Summary by Sector. Disposal locations of waste by town are not tracked. Therefore, waste crossing
in or out of the MSA boundary was unable to be determined. Consequently, it was assumed that waste
categorized as net exports were Scope 3, and in-state disposal were Scope 1. An updated methodology to
calculate emissions resulting from the disposal of waste will be considered in the CCAP.
68. EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, www.epa.gov/household-medication-disposal/map-commercialwaste-combustors-us. Accessed 28 Jan. 2024.
69. Budris, Kevin, “Aging Waste Incinerators Pose a Danger to New Englanders.” Conservation Law
Foundation. December 9, 2019. https://www.clf.org/blog/aging-incinerators-pose-a-danger/.
70. There are also several waste-to-energy incinerators in close proximity to the MSA including the
Wheelabrator Concord in Penacock, NH and Wheelabrator Millbury in MA. “Municipal Waste Combustors”
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. https://www.mass.gov/guides/municipal-wastecombustors.; “Biennial Solid Waste Report” New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
(2019) https://www.des.nh.gov/sites/g/files/ehbemt341/files/documents/2020-01/r-wmd-19-02.pdf
71. The emissions from the transportation of waste are included in the transportation data and not reflected in
the waste emissions data.
72. ”Solid Waste Master Plan”. Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. (2021). https://www.
mass.gov/guides/solid-waste-master-plan
73. “2022 Solid Waste Management Plan.” New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, 30 Sept.
2022, https://www.des.nh.gov/sites/g/files/ehbemt341/files/documents/r-wmd-22-03.pdf.
74. “MassDEP Waste Disposal Bans” Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. MassDEP
Waste Disposal Bans | Mass.gov
75. “Zero Waste and Economic Recovery: The Job Creation Potential of Zero Waste Solutions.” GAIA, https://
www.no-burn.org/wp-content/uploads/Jobs-Report-ENGLISH-1.pdf.

97

5. Implementation
and Next Steps
The next six years will be a vital time for communities and the region to reduce GHG emissions
rapidly and equitably to prevent the worst and disproportionate impacts of climate change. By 2030,
the work on the eleven priority measures outlined in this plan, as well as priority measures in the
Massachusetts and New Hampshire state plans, must be well underway. Fortunately, local, regional,
and state government and community partners have shown leadership over nearly two decades
on sustainability and climate issues. While much of the local authority to plan, adopt policies, and
implement programs in this PCAP lies within municipal government, the role of regional planning
agencies and commissions, state policy and funding, and federal policy and funding will all be
essential to meeting local and state GHG emission reduction goals. Collaboration across sectors
and levels of government will be needed to make substantial progress on the priority measures. The
following section outlines the relevant authorities to implement and key considerations in carrying out
the plan.

5.1.  Municipal Authority to Implement
Within the Greater Boston MSA, Massachusetts and New Hampshire delegate different levels
of authority to municipal government. Massachusetts is a home rule state, with strong local
authority to pass policies and govern themselves. New Hampshire is a Dillons Rule state, which
means municipal governments are limited in their authority by what the state has explicitly
defined. The following is an overview of some of the relevant roles that local governments have.
Role

Massachusetts Municipal
Authority

New Hampshire Municipal
Authority

Fiscal: Budget, taxation, and
capital planning

Yes

Yes

Land use planning and
policy (master plans, zoning
and permitting)

Yes, although state law sets
some requirements

Yes, although state law sets
some requirements

Code adoption and
enforcement (Building, fire,
and energy Codes)

Codes are adopted at the
state level and enforced
locally; Municipal opt-in
Stretch Energy Code and
Specialized Code available.

Codes adopted at the state
level, but counties and
municipalities may adopt
stricter codes.

Control of municipal and
school facilities

Yes

Yes, municipal facilities;
School Districts are
considered separate
entities.
98

Role

Massachusetts Municipal
Authority

New Hampshire Municipal
Authority

Municipal-owned roads and
rights-of-way

Yes

Yes

Electricity generation

Municipal Light Plantyes; option for municipal
aggregation through DPU
approvals.

Municipal Light Plantyes; option for municipal
aggregation through DUC
approvals.

Education, outreach,
and communication on
programs

Yes

Yes

In addition to local authority, municipalities can establish shared services and facilities that pool
resources, expertise, and functions. Some relevant examples of this include shared school
districts, regional public health services, shared staff roles like sustainability planners or energy
managers, waste and water, regional climate resilience planning and projects, and regional
transportation.

5.2.  Regional Planning
Both Massachusetts and New Hampshire rely on regional government agencies. In
Massachusetts there are 13 Regional Planning Agencies (RPA), four of which are in the Greater
Boston MSA. In New Hampshire there are nine Regional Planning Commissions (RPC), three
of which are in the MSA. While RPAs/RPCs do not have the authority to adopt policies or
regulations, they play a critical role in developing regional plans and strategies, informing state
policy, and providing technical assistance on a wide variety of topics to local governments and
partner organizations, including on land use, climate, sustainability, and clean energy issues.
RPAs/RPCs can also establish regional programs that provide education, outreach procurement,
and technical support across multiple communities. RPAs/RPCs can help local governments
regionalize and establish shared services, including joint procurement. Regional government can
support all priority measures identified in this PCAP, and several can be led or co-led by RPAs/
RPCs.

5.3.  Building Partnerships
In addition to local and regional government, many of the measures outlined in this plan require
trusted, impactful relationships with community partners, including local community-based
organizations and non-profits led by LIDAC community members. Municipalities should also
build government-to-government relationships with Tribal Councils, which serve as tribes’
legislative bodies. Approaches should draw on collaborative governance, described by the
National Policy Consensus Center as “community and public policy decision making processes

99

and structures that enable participants [across the boundaries of public, private, and civic
sectors] to work together [and leverage the unique attributes and resources of each] to enhance
their communities and shape sustainable public policy decisions.”1
Some examples of collaborative governance in the climate space include:
• The Mass Save program’s Community First Partnership funds municipalities to
collaborate with community-based organizations and hire part-time staff to conduct
outreach about energy efficiency and decarbonization incentive focused on reaching
households underserved by Mass Save Programs.2
• Boston’s Building Emissions Reduction Ordinance is a new municipal policy that
was shaped by community members’ concerns and multiple stakeholder discussions.
Community-based organizations including Alternatives for Community and Environment,
advocated for an equitable policy design process that included a policy implementation
review board comprised of two-thirds community members.3
Implementation of the Greater Boston Climate Action Plan offers an exciting opportunity for
municipalities to build relationships and shape policies, practices, and programs to decarbonize
and improve housing, transportation, electricity generation, public health, and climate resilience
in LIDAC communities.

5.4.  Centering Equity in Planning
and Implementation
Local and regional governments also have opportunities to counter economic and racial
inequities through the implementation of the PCAP. Existing inequitable conditions have resulted
from a long history of discriminatory housing, transportation, economic, and environmental
policies and practices whose legacy continues to impact today’s communities.4 For example,
low-income households and households of color continue to be concentrated in formerly
red-lined neighborhoods with inadequate, older homes which results in higher energy bills.5
Another example includes historic placement of highways that cut through LIDAC communities
in Massachusetts, increasing air pollution, physically dividing communities and economics,
and removing community members and businesses by eminent domain.6 These realities are
essential to consider when implementing programs such as building decarbonization and public
transit expansion. Future efforts to reduce climate impacts should focus on repairing past harms
and ensuring frontline communities are the primary beneficiaries.
Building and re-building trust between government and communities requires time, internal
reflection and institutionalization of equity, and accountability measures and feedback loops.7
Initiatives, such as the Racial Equity Advancement and Collaborative Hub, a training and peer
learning initiative for municipal staff led and supported by the Government Alliance on Equity,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and MAPC, help to encourage municipal staff to explicitly
consider racial equity in policies, funding, hiring, practices, programs, and more.8 While the
results of these policies won’t be solved solely within the context of the Greater Boston Climate
Action Plan, the implementation of the measures offer a clear opportunity to begin implementing
these best practices and centering equity in all climate work throughout the region.

100

5.5.  Next Steps
The PCAP is the first deliverable of the EPA’s Climate Pollution Reduction Grant planning
program, which continues through August 2027. The next planning phase is the development of
the Comprehensive Climate Action Plan (CCAP), which will be completed by August 2025 and
followed by implementation and status updates in 2027.

PCAP
March
2024
CCAP
August
2025
Status
Update
August
2027

The CCAP will include identifying measures in additional sectors and both near-term and longterm emissions reduction priorities. It will also include an updated GHG inventory and establish
long-term GHG emissions projections and reduction targets. The CCAP will expand on the
measures in the PCAP to include co-pollutant and workforce planning analyses. The project team
and advisory groups will expand community engagement efforts during the CCAP, particularly
within LIDAC communities in the region. Engagement will likely include additional public listening
sessions, sector- and stakeholder-specific focus groups, and surveys.
Information about the CPRG process and opportunities to engage will be regularly updated on
the Greater Boston Climate Action Plan webpage.

101

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

1. ”Building a Collaborative Framework: A Five-Step Process,” National Policy Consensus Center, 2020,
1-Building-a-Collaborative-Governance-Framework.pdf (pdx.edu)
2. ”Community First Partnership,” Mass Save, https://www.masssave.com/trade-partners/communitypartnership
3. “Collaborative Governance and Movement Toward a Just Transition: Boston’s Building Emissions Reduction
& Disclosure Ordinance (BERDO 2.0),” Alternatives for Community and Environment, https://www-f.
nescaum.org/documents/centering-health-equity-and-environmental-justice-webinar/ace-berdo-2-0nescaum-presentation7-28-22.pdf/
4. “Racial Equity in Housing in the COVID-19 Era,” The Boston Foundation, 2020, https://www.tbf.org/-/media/
tbf/reports-and-covers/2020/gbhrc-2020-report-2-racial-equity.pdf
5. Lewis, Jamal and Hernandez, Diana. ”Energy Efficiency as Energy Justice: Addressing Racial Inequities
through Investments in People and Place.” Energy Efficiency vol 13, 3 (2019): 419-432. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7966972/
6. “A Brief History of How Racism Shaped Interstate Highways,” GBH, 7, April, 2021, A Brief History Of How
Racism Shaped Interstate Highways | GBH (wgbh.org)
7. ”Collaborative Governance and Community Trust: Municipal Models for Earning the Trust of Marginalized
Communities,” Harvard Kennedy School, 2022, Microsoft Word - Grueber Mello_Collaborative
Governance and Trust_PAE_Final_CLEAN.docx (harvard.edu)
8. ”Racial Equity Advancement and Collaborative Hub,” MAPC, https://www.mapc.org/resource-library/racialequity-advancement-collaborative-hub/

102

Glossary
Air Pollution: small particulates, dust, gases, and aerosols that are released into the atmosphere that reduce
air quality and have negative effects on human health and the environment. Air pollution can get inside our lungs
and sometimes even our bloodstream. This is linked to many health issues, including asthma, heart attacks, and
lung disease.
Air Source Heat Pump (ASHP): an efficient technology that provides space heating and cooling by pulling heat
from the air and does not require on-site combustion of fossil fuels. ASHPs are often categorized as a ducted
system or mini-splits.
Carbon Emissions: carbon dioxide (CO2) is a greenhouse gas that’s emitted when fossil fuels, such as coal,
natural gas, methane, oil, and gasoline, are burned in vehicles, during the generation of electricity and heating,
and for industrial processes (such as in factories).
Carbon Neutral Policy: a policy goal to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions through energy efficiency
and clean energy, and the remaining emissions are balanced by carbon “offsets”, strategies that remove carbon
from the atmosphere or keep carbon in the ground.
Clean Energy: sources of electricity, heating, and cooling derived from renewable technologies including
solar photovoltaics (PV), solar hot water, wind, geothermal, air source heat pumps, as well as other emerging
technologies such as waste energy recovery. These sources are also known as renewable energy because they
are not from limited fossil fuel-based sources like coal, methane gas, and oil.
Clean Heating/Cooling: sources of energy that provide heating in the winter and/or cooling in the summer from
renewable energy sources and not the burning of fossil fuels. Some examples include air source heat pumps,
geothermal, and waste heat recovery.
Climate Adaptation: making changes to the built infrastructure (such as buildings and homes) or the natural
environment (such as parks and open space) to best prepare them for the impacts of climate change, including
flooding, drought, extreme heat, and extreme storms.
Climate Change: describes the long-term changes in average weather patterns, temperatures, and
precipitation across the world due to the warming of the earth’s atmosphere. Scientific consensus shows
that current climate change is caused by human activity, specifically the burning of fossil fuels that release
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere causing global temperatures to increase. While global average
temperatures are rising, the local impact to weather may include both increases and decreases in temperature,
changes in precipitation (rain and snow), increased risk of severe weather events, sea level rise, and other
changes. Climate change impacts the world around us including shifts in agricultural and growing seasons,
pollen and air quality, insect borne diseases, pests, and other impacts to the environment.
Climate Mitigation: strategies to slow down and reduce the severity of climate change impacts by reducing the
amount of greenhouse gases emitted into the air.
Climate Preparedness: preparing for the impacts of climate change, including emergency planning and
community services.

103

Community Choice Aggregation (CCA) or Green Municipal Aggregation: also known as municipal
electricity aggregation, allows town and city governments to use bulk purchasing power (where they pay a
lower price for the service in exchange for purchasing a larger quantity of the service) to negotiate contracts
for electricity supply on behalf of the residents and small businesses in the community that are on the basic
electricity service. The contracts often include a higher percentage of renewable energy than standard electricity
mix.
Community Shared Solar (CSS): a program that allows multiple electric energy customers to subscribe,
participate, or purchase a portion of a solar energy project located somewhere else in their community (for
example, a field with solar panels). Participants receive a credit on their utility bill for their portion of clean energy
produced. This is an option for those who cannot install solar panels on their own property for any reason and
renters.
Decarbonization: reducing and ultimately eliminating fossil fuel-based energy sources in the energy, buildings,
and transportation sectors.
District Energy: type of heating and cooling system (thermal energy) that is done at a neighborhood or district
scale across multiple properties. District energy can either use fossil fuels, such as natural gas or renewable
sources like geothermal to power the system.
Electric Vehicle (EV): a vehicle, such as a car or truck, that is powered fully or mostly by electricity instead of
gasoline.
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE): also called charging stations or charging docks, the equipment
that provides electric power to recharge the vehicle’s battery. EVSE systems include conductors, software,
communications protocols, and other related equipment.
Electricity Grid: the full electricity system including power plants that generate electricity, and the transmission
and distribution lines that transmit electricity to power the homes, businesses, and facilities that use it.
Electrification: converting a machine or system to use electricity instead of burning natural gas, oil, or other
fuels. The benefit of electrification is that the energy source can come from renewable sources such as solar PV
or wind.
Energy Burden: the percentage of a household’s income spent on home energy bills. A high energy burden is a
household that spends more than an average share of their income.
Energy Efficiency (EE): process to make a building or site utilize less electricity, natural gas, delivery fuel, or
other energy sources. This includes things like installing LED lightbulbs, weatherization, using smart sensors/
automatic light switches, tankless water heaters, energy smart appliances, and behavioral changes of the
building occupants.
Energy Insecurity: people who are unable to pay for basic energy needs such as heating, cooling, and lighting
in their homes live in a state of energy insecurity. This is often the case when a household has a very high energy
burden and may be at risk of having utilities shut off due to non-payment.

104

Energy Storage (ES): also known as “battery storage” allows for the storage of electricity to be used later. There
are now commercially available batteries at a wide range of capacity- including residential, commercial, and
utility scale storage. Storage can be paired with solar energy for additional benefits and incentives. ES can be
used to manage demand and peak shaving or increase resilience of the grid on specific sites.
Environmental Justice (EJ): the principle that all people have a right to be protected from environmental
hazards and experience healthy environments regardless of race, ethnicity, income, immigration status, or
English language proficiency.
Environmental Justice Community: in Massachusetts, communities designated as Environmental Justice
meet one or more of the criteria- low-income, minority, or language isolation. EJ communities often historically
and presently have a higher exposure and sensitivity to environmental harms.
Equity: the condition of fair and just inclusion into a society. Equity will exist when those who have been most
marginalized have equal access to opportunities, power, participation, and resources and all have avenues to
safe, healthy, productive, and fulfilling lives. It requires restructuring deeply entrenched systems of privilege and
oppression that have led to the uneven distribution of benefits and burdens over multiple generations."
Extended-Range Electric Vehicles: a type of plug-in hybrid vehicle that can go further distances than a
traditional EV, due to an axillary engine that can be used to charge the vehicle's battery when it is depleted. Only
electricity is used to power and drive the wheels.
Fossil Fuels: carbon-based fuels mined or drilled from the earth such as coal, oil, natural gas/methane gas, and
gasoline. When processed and burned, fossil fuels emit greenhouse gases and other harmful pollutants.
Geothermal: a renewable energy source that extracts heat from the earth and can be used for heating and
cooling, or to generate electricity. Geothermal may be used at a single building scale like Ground Source Heat
Pumps or a district scale such as networked geothermal which connects multiple buildings.
Greenhouse Gases (GHG): when fossil fuels like gasoline, diesel, and natural gas are burned they emit gases
such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane into the atmosphere. These gases trap heat around the earth which
changes our worldwide climate. This is referred to as the greenhouse gas effect.
Greenhouse Gas Inventory: a greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory accounts for the emissions within a
geographic boundary (municipality, state) in a specific year. GHG emissions can be accounted for through
different methods, the most common of which is to look at emissions that result from activities occurring within
the geographic boundary. GHG emissions are expressed in Metric Tons Equivalent of Carbon, even though
there are many types of GHGs.
Ground Sources Heat Pump: also known as a Geothermal Heat Pump, an efficient technology that provides
space heating and cooling, and potentially hot water by pulling heat from the ground and does not require on-site
combustion of fossil fuels.
Microgrids: electrical system that utilize battery storage and sometimes solar to be able to island or separate
from the electricity grid in case of an outage. Microgrids can improve resilience and reliability, particularly for
critical community facilities. Microgrids typically connect adjacent or co-located properties.

105

Micro-mobility: small scale and slow speed transportation devices that are human or electric powered,
including bicycles, electric bikes (e-bikes), bike share, and electric scooters, hoverboards, and skateboards.
Mild Hybrid Electric Vehicles: vehicles that use a battery and electric motor to power the vehicle and allow the
engine to shut off when the vehicle stops but cannot power the vehicle alone.
Net Zero: process by which a single building or community reduces energy consumption first through energy
efficiency, and then produces the same amount of energy it uses through renewable sources like solar. Some net
zero definitions require on-site or in-region generation.
Plug-in-Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV): a vehicle that uses batteries to power an electric motor and another
fuel, such as gasoline, to power and internal combustion engine. The batteries can be charged via charging
equipment or through regenerative braking.
Solar Photovoltaics (PV): form of renewable energy that uses solar panels or array to capture the energy from
the sun and produce electricity. Solar PV can be used on different scales, including small residential rooftops,
solar parking canopies, medium scale rooftop solar on commercial or institutional buildings, or large-scale
ground mounted solar.
Sustainability: means meeting the needs of today without compromising the needs of future generations.
Including social, economic, and environmental needs. In addition to issues around climate and energy,
sustainability often includes things like waste, recycling, composting, and addressing environmental pollution.
Weatherization: the process of sealing up air leaks and adding insulation to homes and buildings to better save
energy, money, and improve quality of the building.

106

Appendix A.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Inventory Methodology

107

A.1.  Summary Overview
The greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions inventory was conducted using a baseline year of 2017.
Emissions were categorized into five key sectors: stationary energy & electricity, transportation,
waste, agriculture, and natural & working lands. Descriptions of the type of data included for each
of these sectors is included in Appendix Table 1.
Appendix Table 1: Community-wide Emissions Sectors and Subsectors
Sector
Stationary
Energy &
Electricity

Subsector
Residential Buildings

Source
Electricity
Electricity Transmission
&Distribution (T&D) Losses
Fuel Oil
Natural Gas
Natural Gas Distribution Losses

Commercial & Institutional
Buildings & Manufacturing
Industries

Electricity
Electricity T&D Losses
Fuel Oil
Natural Gas
Natural Gas Distribution Losses
Off-Road (Various Fuels)

Construction

Off-Road (Various Fuels)

108

Sector
Transportation

Subsector
On-road (and MBTA Ferries)

Source
Compressed Natural Gas (CNG)
Diesel
Electricity
Electricity T&D Losses
Gasoline

Rail

Diesel
Electricity
Electricity T&D Losses

Waste

Solid Waste Disposal

Methane Commitment

Biological Treatment of Waste

Direct Emissions

Incineration and Open Burning

Incineration

Wastewater Treatment and
Discharge

Effluent

Solid Waste Disposal

Methane Commitment

Incineration and Open Burning

Incineration

Agriculture

Fertilizer

Fertilizer Application

Natural &
Working Lands

Carbon Sequestration

Urban Forestry

The MAPC GHG Emissions Inventory Tool’s methodology was used as the basis for calculating
CO2e emissions (MMT) for all sectors. Please refer to the Tool’s detailed methodology document
for further details. Variations made to the methodology from the MAPC Tool, in order to most
accurately represent the MSA, are described in the detailed sector summaries below.

109

A.2.  Data Summaries by Sector
Electricity & Stationary Energy
Electricity
Data for the electricity subsector sources were collected from publicly available state and federal
datasets, as identified in Appendix Table 2.
Appendix Table 2: Electricity Subsector Sources
Sector

Subsector

Source

Dataset

Description

Electricity

Residential,
Commercial,
Institutional
Buildings

Electricity
Usage by
Community
(MA)

MassSave
Data1

MassSave electricity data
by community for 2017.
Usage data is calendarized
to represent actual usage
(not billing) in a given month
or year and is available for
all communities served by
investor-owned electric
utilities.

Electricity
Usage by
County (NH)

EIA2

EIA statewide electricity
data by sector for 2017.
Coupled with Economic &
Social Indicators for New
Hampshire, 2017-2021 report
which includes a pie chart of
the percentage breakdown
of electricity consumption
by county. This report also
sourced electricity data from
EIA.

Municipal
Light
Departments
(MA)

MA DPU3
& MA
DEP4

Municipal Light Plant
annual returns from the MA
Department of Public Utilities
(DPU). This data source fills
the gaps from Mass Save
where it says "municipal."

Community
Choice
Aggregation
(MA)

MA DPU5

Municipal aggregation
annual reports from MA
DPU, containing usage and
program.

Electricity
T&D Losses
(MA & NH)

EIA6

T&D losses.

110

There were a few variations made to the methodology from the MAPC Tool, in order to most
accurately represent the MSA. They included the following:
• New England eGRID emissions factors were used for NH electricity calculations.
• In 2017, NH did not have any community choice aggregation or municipal utilities.
• NH Transmission & Distribution Grid Loss Factor (%) was determined based the 2017 EIA
NH electricity profile and calculated separately from the MA Transmission & Distribution
Grid Loss Factor. The calculation results are shown in Appendix Table 3.
Appendix Table 3: Electricity Transmission & Distribution Grid Loss Factor for New
Hampshire
Total
Disposition
(MWh)

Direct Use
(MWh)

Total Disposition
Excluding Direct
Use (MWh)

Estimated
Losses (MWh)

Grid Loss
Factor (%)

17,585,222

105,111

17,480,111

586,810

3.36%

The results of the electricity emissions calculations are shown in Appendix Table 4.
Appendix Table 4: Community-wide Electricity CO2e Emissions
Sector

Subsector

Source

Carbon Dioxide
Equivalent
Emissions
(MMT CO2e)

Percent of Total
Communitywide Emissions

Electricity

Residential
Buildings

Electricity

2.80

6.3%

Electricity
T&D Losses

0.14

0.3%

Electricity

5.29

11.9%

Electricity
T&D Losses

0.26

0.6%

Commercial
& Institutional
Buildings &
Manufacturing
Industries

Stationary Energy
Data for the stationary energy subsector sources were collected from publicly available state and
federal datasets, as identified in Appendix Table 5.

111

Appendix Table 5: Stationary Energy Sources and Datasets
Sector

State

Source

Dataset

Description

Stationary
Energy

MA &
NH

Off-Road
County
Total and
Manufacturing
Employment

US Census

US Census Data from Table
CB1700CBP All Sectors:
County Business Patterns by
Legal Form of Organization
and Employment Size Class
for U.S., States, and Selected
Geographics: 2017. This is
county level employment
data for all sectors and the
manufacturing sector.

Stationary
Energy

MA &
NH

Off-Road
County and
City/Town
Total and
Manufacturing
Employment

US Census

US Census Data from
Table S2405 Industry by
Occupation for the Civilian
Employed Population 16
Years and Over, 2017 5 year
estimate. This source has
county and city/town level
data for total employment and
manufacturing employment.

Stationary
Energy

NH

Natural Gas by
sector for the
state

EIA

EIA statewide natural gas
usage for 2017 by sector
(residential, commercial,
industrial, vehicle, electric
power) in units of million cubic
feet. Have natural gas loses by
state for 2017 also.

Stationary
Energy

MA

Natural Gas
usage by
community by
month

MassSave

MassSave statewide Natural
Gas data by community or
county for 2017. Usage data
is calendarized to represent
actual usage (not billing) in a
given month or year.

Stationary
Energy

NH

EPA MOVES
off-road
transportation
emissions

EPA MOVES

This data source will fill the
gaps from Mass DataCommon
where there was no NH data
for off-road transportation
emissions by county

112

Sector

State

Source

Dataset

Description

Stationary
Energy

NH

FHWA gas
consumption
for
transportation
emissions

FHWA

FHWA Highway Statistics
Series 2017 Table MF-24 data
on gasoline consumption for
non-highway construction
vehicles and industrial/
commercial vehicles (CO2
only)

Stationary
Energy

MA

County
Off-Road
Transportation
Emissions
CO2 & CH4

DataCommon

County off road transportation
emissions

Stationary
Energy

MA

Square Feet
of Developed
Open Space

DataCommon

Open space off road county
and municipality landscaped
area emissions

Stationary
Energy

MA

Commercial
and Industrial
Heating Oil

EOLWD

Massachusetts Executive
Office of Labor and Workforce
Development (EOLWD)
Employment and Wages (ES202) annual report data, all
ownership types, with "Total,
All Industries", "Category and
all sub-categories". County
level data was used and
communities that are not in
the MSA were subtracted from
county totals.

Stationary
Energy

NH

Square Feet
of Developed
Open Space

NLCD

Square feet of developed open
space from the National Land
Cover Database for 2016.
Developed open Space defined
as "Developed, Open Spaceareas with a mixture of some
constructed materials, but
mostly vegetation in the form
of lawn grasses. Impervious
surfaces account for less than
20% of total cover. These
areas most commonly include
large-lot single-family housing
units, parks, golf courses,
and vegetation planted
in developed settings for
recreation, erosion control, or
aesthetic purposes."
113

Sector

State

Source

Dataset

Description

Stationary
Energy

NH

Commercial
and Industrial
Heating Oil

NHES

Annual Census of Employment
& Wages for Labor Market
Areas from the New Hampshire
Employment Security (NHES)
for 2017. Data includes three
digit NAICS codes, number
of establishments (units) and
average annual employment.
The Labor Market Areas used
included the NH portions of
Nashua, Lowell-BillericaChelmsford, LawrenceMethuen-Salem, and HaverhillNewburyport-Amesbury.
The Nashua LMA included
3 communities that are not
within the MSA and these
were excluded using the 2 digit
codes by community.

Stationary
Energy

MA &
NH

Municipal
Heating Oil

EIA

Fuel oil consumption and
conditional energy intensity
by census region from
the Energy Information
Administration (EIA) 2018
Commercial Buildings
Energy Consumption Survey
(CBECS) Data. 156 million
gallons of fuel oil consumed
by local government owned
buildings in the Northeast
which includes the 6 New
England states, NY, NJ, and
PA. This data was used with
2017 Census data for Number
of Municipalities in each state.
The number of municipalities
in the MSA represents 2.6%
of all municipalities in the 9
states and this percentage was
multiplied by the total gallons of
fuel oil.

114

There were a few variations made to the methodology from the MAPC Tool, in order to most
accurately represent the MSA. They included the following:
• The same percentages as electricity consumption by county were applied to identify natural
gas consumption that should be allocated to the NH portion of the MSA.7
• To determine NH Fuel Oil consumption, the Massachusetts values were scaled based on
details in Appendix Table 6.
Appendix Table 6: Scaling for the Fuel Oil Adjustment Ratio for NH8
Scale

Fuel oil consumption per household using
fuel oil (gallons)

US

507

MA

619

NH

591

Adjustment Ratio

1.45

Electricity & Stationary Energy Summary
Results of the electricity and stationary energy consumption for the MSA are describe in
Appendix Tables 7 & 8.
Appendix Table 7: SUMMARY Community-wide Electricity & Stationary Energy Usage and
Emissions
Type

kWh

Percent

Investor Owned Utilities

30,852,994,515

82.4%

Community Choice
Aggregation

602,824,815

1.6%

Municipal Utilities

4,179,481,554

11.2%

T&D Losses (all)

1,805,800,273

4.8%

115

Appendix Table 8: SUMMARY Community-wide Summary of Building Energy Use by
Subsector & Source
Subsector

Source

Emissions
(MTCO2e)

% of Total
Energy
Emissions

Residential
Buildings

Res. Electricity

2,798,270

12.6%

Res. Fuel Oil

3,087,157

13.9%

Res. Natural Gas

4,686,913

21.1%

Comm. & Man.
Electricity

5,288,009

23.8%

Comm. & Man. Fuel
Oil

530,477

2.4%

5,795,272

26.1%

Electricity

8,086,279

36.4%

Fuel Oil

3,617,634

16.3%

Natural Gas

10,482,185

47.2%

Commercial
& Institutional
Buildings and
Facilities &
Manufacturing
Industries*
All Buildings

*The above energy consumption and emissions data excludes electricity transmission and
distribution losses associated with electricity and natural gas.

Transportation
There were a few variations made to the methodology from the MAPC Tool, in order to most
accurately represent the MSA. They included the following:
• The MAPC Tool recommends using 2014 MA Vehicle Census Data for on-road vehicles,
however, more recent data has since been released and was used to interpolate values for
2017.
• NH on-road vehicle data was sourced from national Department of Transportation (DOT)
and Department of Energy (DOE) resources, as described in Appendix Table 9. The data
was not available by the same fuel types as MA data.
• Data pertaining to public buses were likely already included in both the MA and NH datasets
and the quantities of fuel obtained directly from regional transit authorities (RTAs) were
subtracted from commercial fuel usage and bus fuel usage for MA and NH, respectively, to
avoid double counting emissions associated with public transportation.

116

Appendix Table 9: Transportation Sources and Datasets
Sector

State

Source

Dataset

Description

Transportation

MA

On-road
vehicles

MA Vehicle
census
(interpolated
by MAPC to
obtain 2017
data)

Residential, commercial, state,
and municipal vehicle fuel
usage by fuel type (gasoline,
diesel, flexfuel, hybrid, electric)

Transportation

NH

On-road
vehicles

DOT State
Statistical
Abstracts,9
DOT
Highway
Statistics
Motor Fuel
Use10

Registered vehicles, vehicle
miles traveled, and fuel usage
(gasoline and special fuels)
by vehicle type (automobile,
buses, trucks, motorcycles)

Transportation

NH

Electric
vehicles

DOE Vehicle
Registrations
by State11

Electric vehicles registered in
NH in 2017

Transportation

MA

MBTA
Buses,
trackless
trolley,
The Ride,
ferries,
heavy &
light rail,
commuter
rail

MBTA
Data APTA
Metrics

Quantities of gasoline, diesel,
CNG, and electricity by source

Transportation

MA &
NH

Other
regional
transit
authorities

Contacted
RTAs directly

Quantities of gasoline, diesel,
CNG, and electricity associated
with fixed route and on-demand
services

Refer to Appendix Tables 12 & 13 for emissions by transportation subsector.

Waste
Waste emissions were calculated based on the following four subsectors: Solid Waste Disposal,
Biological Treatment of Waste, Incineration and Open Burning, and Wastewater Treatment and
Discharge.

117

There were a few variations made to the methodology from the MAPC Tool, in order to most
accurately represent the MSA. They included the following:
• Disposal locations of waste by town are not tracked. Therefore, waste crossing in or out of
the MSA boundary was unable to be determined. Consequently, it was assumed that waste
categorized as net exports were Scope 3, and in-state disposal were Scope 1.
• Mass of solid waste disposed by composting and anaerobic digestion for the MSA was
estimated using the EPA dataset described in Appendix Table 10. Using MA as the basis for
the MSA estimation, tons per person of composting waste were calculated, and then that
rate was applied to the total population of the MSA.
Appendix Table 10: Waste Sources and Datasets
Sector

State

Source

Dataset

Description

Waste

MA &
NH

Solid Waste
Disposal

MassDEP12

Tons landfilled waste

Waste

MA &
NH

Biological
Treatment of Waste

EPA13

Composting & anaerobic
digestion

Waste

MA &
NH

Incineration and
Open Burning

MassDEP16

Tons incinerated waste

Waste

MA &
NH

Wastewater
Treatment and
Discharge

US Census,
MWRA
(contacted
directly)

Percent of MSA population
served by WWTPs with
anaerobic digestion and cogeneration systems and other
WWTPs

Refer to Appendix Tables 12 & 13 for emissions by waste subsector.

Agriculture
The MAPC GHG Emissions Inventory Tool does not include natural and working lands and it
was therefore added to this regional GHG inventory to account for emissions associated with
agricultural fertilizers. For this sector, the EPA Local Greenhouse Gas Inventory Tool was used to
determine methodology.
Fertilizer application to lands within the MSA contribute to GHG emissions from the volatilization
into the air in the form of nitrous oxide (N2O). The portion of the quantities of commercial fertilizer
purchased in MA and NH were allocated to the MSA by using the percent of farms or acres of
farms by county. In counties that are not fully within the MSA, a portion was allocated based on
land area.

118

Appendix Table 11: Agriculture Sources and Datasets
Sector

State

Source

Dataset

Description

Agriculture

MA &
NH

Commercial
fertilizer
usage

EPA14

Commercial
fertilizer purchased
in 2017

State Census of Agriculture
(UMass15, USDA16)

Land in farms in
2017

Natural and Working Lands
The MAPC GHG Emissions Inventory Tool does not include natural and working lands and it was
therefore added to this regional GHG inventory to account for carbon sequestration from trees.
The OurTrees tool from i-Tree17 was used to obtain the annual carbon sequestered and CO2
equivalent in units of tons for each community in the MSA. The value for all communities was
summed to get the total annual carbon sequestration for the region. This tool also provides air
pollution removal for carbon monoxide, ozone, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and PM2.5.

A.3.  Further GHG Inventory Detailed Results
Appendix Table 12: Community-wide Emissions Summary by Sector
Sector

MTCO2e

MMTCO2e

Percent

Stationary Energy

18,309,819

18.3

41%

Electricity

8,487,727

8.5

19%

Transportation

15,290,327

15.3

34%

Waste

2,300,097

2.3

5%

Agriculture

29,597

0.03

0.1%

Natural & Working Lands

(2,484,411)

(2.5)

Gross Emissions

44,417,568

44.4

Net Emissions

41,933,156

41.9

100%

119

Appendix Table 13: Community-wide Emissions Summary by Sector and Subsector
Sector

Subsector

Total
Emissions
(MT CO2e)

% of Total
Emissions

% of
Emissions in
Respective
Sector

Stationary
Energy &
Electricity

Residential
Buildings

11,981,189

27.0%

44.7%

C&I Buildings &
Manufacturing
Industries

14,367,269

32.3%

53.6%

Construction

449,089

1.0%

1.7%

MA Passenger
Vehicles

11,218,951

25.3%

73.4%

MA Commercial
Vehicles

1,426,488

3.2%

9.3%

MA State &
Municipal Vehicles

149,417

0.3%

1.0%

MA On-road Buses
and Trolleys

126,007

0.3%

0.8%

MA Railways

215,249

0.5%

1.4%

NH Vehicles

2,153,116

4.8%

14.1%

NH Buses

1,099

0.0%

0.0%

Solid Waste
Disposal

1,947,928

4.4%

84.7%

Biological
Treatment of Waste

3,112

0.0%

0.1%

Incineration and
Open Burning

72,007

0.2%

3.1%

Wastewater
Treatment and
Discharge

277,051

0.6%

12.0%

Transportation

Waste

120

Sector

Subsector

Total
Emissions
(MT CO2e)

% of Total
Emissions

% of
Emissions in
Respective
Sector

Agriculture

Commercial
Fertilizer

29,597

0.1%

100%

Natural &
Working Lands

Carbon
Sequestration

(2,484,411.40)
100%

100%

All Sectors & Subsectors
(Gross Emissions)

44,417,568

121

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

1. https://www.masssavedata.com/public/home
2. https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data.php
3. https://www.mass.gov/info-details/find-an-mlp-annual-return
4. https://www.mass.gov/doc/2017-summary-massachusetts-ghg-emissions-reports-for-retail-sellers-ofelectricity/download
5. https://www.mass.gov/info-details/municipal-aggregation-annual-reports#2017-annual-reports6. https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data.php
7. https://www.nhes.nh.gov/elmi/products/documents/vs23-all-chap-full-pub.pdf (pg. 51 of 103)
8. https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/cbf6875974554a74823232f84f563253
9. https://explore.dot.gov/views/StateStatisticalAbstracts_16699101653250/
DashboardALT?%3Aembed=y&%3Aiid=1&%3AisGuestRedirectFromVizportal=y
10. https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/2017/mf21.cfm
11. https://afdc.energy.gov/vehicle-registration?year=2017
12. https://www.mass.gov/doc/2017-solid-waste-data-update/download
13. https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-11/documents/2018_wasted_food_report.pdf (pg. 58 & 59)
14. https://www.epa.gov/nutrientpollution/commercial-fertilizer-purchased
15. https://ag.umass.edu/resources/massachusetts-agricultural-data/acres-land-in-farms
16. https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/Online_Resources/County_Profiles/New_
Hampshire/cp99033.pdf
17. https://ourtrees.itreetools.org/#/

122

Appendix B.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Reductions Calculations

123

B.1.  Greenhouse Gas Reduction
Measure Quantification Approach
The estimated greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) reductions were calculated for each of the eleven priority
measures using a variety of publicly available data. All emissions reduction values are provided in units of metric
tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per year (MTCO2e/year), for the year that the measure is completed. Data
sources include:
• Reports published by MA and NH state departments
• Examples: MA Clean Energy and Climate Plan for 2025 and 2030, MA Decarbonization Roadmap, Solid
Waste Master Plan, etc.
• Local examples of successful projects that have tracked metrics
• Examples: Fare-free transit, bike share, etc.
• Quantification tools developed by governments and utilities
• Examples: EPA Avoided Emissions and Generation Tool (AVERT), Mass Save Heating Comparison
Calculator, etc.
The GHG inventory inputs and outputs were modified in order to calculate the GHG emissions reduction
for each priority measure. For calculations that were not directly related to inventory data, consistent 2017
emissions factors were used to estimate the impact of activity data (e.g., kWh, gallons, etc.). Emissions
associated with electricity are expected to decrease over time as more renewable energy is included in the ISO
New England grid mix. For measures related to electrification of buildings and vehicles, the increased electricity
associated with the switch from fossil fuels to electric was included in most calculations. However, emissions
from increased electricity consumption are expected to decrease over time and/or may not capture increased
renewable electricity usage at the local level, which may result in an under-estimate the potential reductions.
During the Comprehensive Climate Action Plan, additional emissions modeling will better estimate the
changing electricity emissions factors. A brief description of the key assumptions accompanies the values for
each measure. Many of the calculations include a low and high range based on these assumptions. Emissions
reduction calculations are calculated per measure and should not be viewed as an aggregated amount due to
potential for double counting emissions reductions and/or interactivity between measures.

TRANSPORTATION
T1. Strategy: Make Public Transit More Affordable & Accessible
T1. Action: Implement fare-free or reduced fare routes and/or passes on key routes in
underserved areas served by the RTAs within the MSA. Implement accessibility and resiliency
measures at and near stops and stations (i.e. benches, ramps, shade structures, sidewalk
improvements, lighting, signage in multiple languages) and improve frequency and reliability of
buses and other transit modes.
T1. GHG Emissions Reduction = 134,298 MTCO2e/year to 268,596 MTCO2e/year
T1. Approach: Reductions were calculated based on information from the Worcester Regional
Transit Authority (WRTA) fare-free program, which is projecting an increase in ridership by 16%
124

from FY23 to FY24 (for system-wide free fares).1 Using National Transit Database Transit Agency
Profile ridership information for 2017, the range of emissions reductions was calculated based on
assuming an increased ridership between 8% and 16% on the MBTA and all RTAs in the MSA.2
Gasoline savings were calculated assuming the avoided trips would have been an average of
10.7 miles with a gasoline vehicle3 with a fuel efficiency of 22.1 miles per gallon.4

T2. Strategy: Expand Multi-Modal Transportation & Micro-Mobility
T2. Action: Create and expand multimodal transportation networks and infrastructure that are
safe and accessible to pedestrians, cyclists, and other micro-mobility technology users (i.e., bike
share and e-bike or e-scooter users). Prioritize connecting commercial centers, schools, and
parks, especially where access to public transit is limited. Develop maps and guides that illustrate
these networks.
T2. GHG Emissions Reduction = 2,166 MTCO2e/year to 4,332 MTCO2e/year
T2. Approach: This measure would lead to an increase in the number of people that bike to
work via Blue Bikes (bike share). The GHG reductions calculations are based on a 15 percent
increase in number of people who bike to work and assume they travel an average Blue Bike trip
distance (1.85 miles) for one additional trip per week (52 weeks/year).5 This resulted in a savings
of 245,789 gallons of gasoline, or if it is assumed the same number of people are taking two trips
per week,6 this would yield a savings of 491,577 gallons of gasoline.

T3. Strategy: Make EVs More Affordable & Accessible
T3. Action: Create EV car share programs; prioritize access and affordability for low-income
households. Expand financial assistance programs (i.e., subsidies, rebates, low-cost financing)
for purchase of EVs.
T3. GHG Emissions Reduction = 269,427 MTCO2e/year to 538,854 MTCO2e/year
T3. Approach: Massachusetts needs 970,000 EVs on the road by 2030 to meet emissions
reduction goals,7 of which about 610,302 vehicles are within the MA portion of the MSA.
Assuming the same ratio for NH, an additional 58,799 vehicles are included in the analysis. For
an average fuel efficiency of 22.1 miles per gallon4 and an average of 12,371 miles traveled per
year, switching from gasoline vehicles to EVs (0.31 kWh/mile)8 yields a GHG reduction of 4.027
MTCO2e/vehicle (accounting for the increase in electricity). If all vehicles were electrified by
2030, the MSA would see a reduction of about 2,694,269 MTCO2e (based on 2017 emissions
factors).9 This measure alone is unlikely to accomplish the goal and therefore a range of 10% to
20% is used to allocate possible reductions.

T4. Strategy: Expand Access To & Affordability of EV Charging
T4. Action: Develop and implement a regional EV charging network strategy, with a focus
on public, curbside, overnight charging, especially near multifamily housing and commercial
centers. Explore EV charging incentives and cost reduction programs to make charging equitable
and accessible to LMI drivers.
T4. GHG Emissions Reduction = 65,936 MTCO2e/year to 131,873 MTCO2e/year
125

T4. Approach: The MSA has an estimated 1,161,901 vehicles10 that are owned by people that
live in multifamily buildings with three or more units. Assuming that one Level 2 charging port
can support 16 electric vehicles (based on the MA Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Coordinating
Council Initial Assessment),11 13,203 charging ports would be needed to support the
electrification of 211,255 vehicles (out of the total of 1,161,901 vehicles) owned by residents of
multifamily buildings, to meet the State’s 2030 vehicle electrification and emissions reduction
goals.12 13 If this were achieved in 2030, the annual emissions reduction would equate to 659,364
MTCO2e (based on 2017 emissions factors). This measure alone is unlikely to accomplish the
goal and therefore a range of 10% to 20% is used to allocate possible reductions.

BUILDINGS
B1. Strategy: Develop & Expand Technical Assistance Programs
B1. Action: Develop and build on existing building decarbonization technical assistance
programs (e.g. energy coaches, CAP agencies, community liaisons/ambassadors, on-call
technical experts) to support residents and businesses with decarbonization planning, provide
outreach and education support on climate and other issues (e.g. health impacts), and connect
residents and businesses to funding and incentive opportunities.
B1. GHG Emissions Reduction = 270,875 MTCO2e/year to 320,125 MTCO2e/year
B1. Approach: Reductions were calculated based on 2017 Mass Save electric and gas incentive
data as a proxy for the energy savings from a technical assistance program.14 For communities
with data unavailable, including NH communities, an average value was assumed based on the
data for the rest of the MSA. The range shows the expected emissions reductions assuming a 1030% increase in adoption rate relative to planned estimates and historical measure installation.

B2. Strategy: Develop & Expand Funding/Finance Programs
B2. Action: Establish financial assistance programs (i.e., on-bill financing, additional subsidies,
pre-weatherization funds, carbon offset fund) to support building decarbonization, energy
efficiency, on-site renewable energy, weatherization, and pre-weatherization barriers, with a focus
on multifamily and affordable housing.
B2. GHG Emissions Reduction = 320,125 MTCO2e/year to 369,375 MTCO2e/year
B2. Approach: Reductions were calculated based on 2017 Mass Save electric and gas incentive
data. For communities with data unavailable, including NH communities, an average value was
assumed based on the data for the rest of the MSA.15 The range shows the expected emissions
reductions assuming a 30-50% increase in adoption rate relative to planned estimates and
historical measure installation.

B3. Strategy: Decarbonize Municipal Buildings
B3. Action: Develop and implement a plan to transition new and existing municipal buildings to
net-zero buildings through building electrification and renewable energy deployment. Establish
a municipal technical assistance program to support decarbonization transition planning and
implementation, including legal support to maximize availability of tax credits.
126

B3. GHG Emissions Reduction = 39,933 MTCO2e/year to 59,900 MTCO2e/year
B3. Approach: Reductions were calculated by assuming municipal natural gas and heating oil
usage (data from Mass Energy Insight for 2017) would decrease by a range of 10% to 15% by
2030.16 Any increase in electricity usage is assumed to be from renewable sources and therefore
no emissions associated with the increase in electricity are included in this calculation.

B4. Strategy: Explore Renewable Thermal Energy Pilots/Projects
B3. Action: Collaborate with utilities to accelerate and facilitate (and/or explore municipal
ownership and development of) networked geothermal or water-based district heating and
cooling projects in key neighborhoods.
B4. GHG Emissions Reduction = 1,468 MTCO2e/year - 2,935 MTCO2e/year
B4. Approach: Given the lengthy process to design, permit, and construct this infrastructure,
it was assumed that between 5 and 10 projects would come online between 2025 and 2030
that each serve 100 buildings.17 Using the Mass Save Heating Comparison Calculator, it was
determined that for every building, assumed to be 1,814 ft2, transitioning from a natural gas boiler
(with portable AC units for a cooling system) to a geothermal heat pump with an annual usage
of 586 therms would yield a carbon reduction of 2.1 MTCO2e per building.18 It was assumed that
for each project 90 buildings would be residential and 10 would be commercial. Commercial
buildings were assumed to be 16,200 square feet and have a baseline energy use of 2.1 kWh
per square foot and 38.4 cubic feet natural gas per square foot, based on the 2018 Commercial
Buildings Energy Consumption Survey from EIA19. Assuming the same total MMBTU per building
and that it was now all was electricity usage, this would result in an emissions savings of 10.5
MTCO2e per building, based on 2017 emissions factors and no increased efficiency.

ENERGY GENERATION
E1. Strategy: Develop Renewable Energy Projects
E1. Action: Expand deployment of renewable energy projects such as community shared solar
and microgrids through expanded municipal ownership and public-private partnerships.
E1. GHG Emissions Reduction = 206,160 MTCO2e/year to 269,049MTCO2e/year
E1. Approach: The total community solar in the MA portion of the MSA was 140.7 MW, as of
2022 according to the DOE Community Solar Market Trends.20 The cumulative MW of community
solar in the MA portion of the MSA have increased an average of 18% per year between 2018
and 2022. The emissions reductions reflect the avoided emissions in 2030 if capacity increases
continued at a rate of 18% (low end) or increased to 22% (high end). The total MW capacity
equates to 528.7 MW (low end) and 690.3 MW (high end) in 2030.

127

E2. Strategy: Adopt Municipal Aggregation
E2. Action: Increase usage of renewable electricity through expanding adoption of Municipal
Aggregation with 100% renewable energy as the default option and achieving 100% renewables
in municipal utility electric supply; include a subsidy for low-to-moderate income customers to
ensure affordability.
E2. GHG Emissions Reduction =
Residential: 910,169 MTCO2e/year to 1,441,100 MTCO2e/year
Commercial: 1,006,074 MTCO2e/year to 1,341,431 MTCO2e/year
E2. Approach: As of February 2024, there are 63 communities in the Massachusetts portion
of the MSA that have been approved for municipal aggregation.21 The emissions reduction
associated with municipal aggregation demonstrates a range of 60% to 100% participation in a
100% renewable option for residential electricity usage and 30% to 40% participation in a 100%
renewable option for commercial electricity, based on 2017 electricity consumption in these 63
communities. This approach was determined in collaboration by project team members.

WASTE
W1. Strategy: Reduce Solid Waste Going to Landfills & Incinerators
W1. GHG Emissions Reduction = 36,967 MTCO2e/year to 55,450 MTCO2e/year
W1. Approach: The MA 2030 Solid Waste Master Plan has a 30% waste reduction goal.22 This
is equivalent to a reduction of 1,185,258 tons of waste (when applied to both MA and NH portions
of MSA), half of which is assumed to be diverted to composting or anaerobic digestion (592,629
tons). This yields an emissions saving of 554,503 MTCO2e. If only a 20% reduction was
achieved, and a 10% diversion to composting or anaerobic digestion, 369,669 MTCO2e would
be reduced. It was assumed that 10% of these reductions can be attributed to this measure and
that additional efforts would be needed to the state level to meet the goal identified in the Solid
Waste Master Plan.

128

Section Endnotes

Click for more
information!

1. Central MA Regional Planning Commission
2. https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd/transit-agency-profiles?field_geography_target_id=All&field_address_
administrative_area=MA&combine=
3. https://nhts.ornl.gov/assets/2017_nhts_summary_travel_trends.pdf
4. Based on 2017 vehicle census data provided by MAPC for passenger gasoline vehicles
5. https://bluebikes.com/system-data
6. Data from Census.gov
7. https://www.mass.gov/doc/ma-2050-decarbonization-roadmap/download
8. Average fuel economy used in GHG Inventory based on values from https://www.fueleconomy.gov/
9. https://www.epa.gov/greenvehicles/greenhouse-gas-emissions-typical-passengervehicle#:~:text=typical%20passenger%20vehicle%3F-,A%20typical%20passenger%20vehicle%20
emits%20about%204.6%20metric%20tons%20of,8%2C887%20grams%20of%20CO2
10. Number of households is consistent with the number used in the GHG inventory and data for MA is from
MAPC Data Common which is sourced from the American Community Survey. NH data obtained from
original ACS source. https://datacommon.mapc.org/browser/datasets/211
11. https://www.mass.gov/files/documents/2023/08/11/EVICC%20Initial%20Assessment%20Final%20
08.11.2023.pdf
12. https://explore.dot.gov/views/StateStatisticalAbstracts_16699101653250/
DashboardALT?%3Aembed=y&%3Aiid=1&%3AisGuestRedirectFromVizportal=y
13. https://www.transportation.gov/rural/ev/toolkit/ev-basics/charging-speeds
14. https://www.masssavedata.com/Public/TimeSeries
15. https://www.masssavedata.com/Public/TimeSeries
16. https://www.massenergyinsight.net/

129

17. https://www.mass.gov/info-details/massachusetts-household-heatingcosts?_gl=1*63pihx*_ga*Njk0MDk5MTMxLjE2NDQ4NDM3ODc.*_ga_
MCLPEGW7WM*MTcwODUzMTQxOC45LjAuMTcwODUzMTQxOC4wLjAuMA
18. https://www.masssave.com/residential/heating-comparison-calculator
19. 2018 Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey, Preliminary Consumption and Expenditures
Highlights (eia.gov)
20. https://www.energy.gov/communitysolar/community-solar-market-trends
21. https://www.mass.gov/info-details/municipal-aggregation
22. https://www.mass.gov/doc/2030-solid-waste-master-plan-working-together-toward-zero-waste/
download

130

Appendix C.
Full List of LIDAC
Communities

131

NOTE: LIDAC designations were sourced from the EPA IRA Disadvantaged Communities dataset provided by
the EPA.
This dataset is a combination of the Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool (CEJST) and the
Environmental Justice Screening tool (EJScreen).

State

Total
Number of
Towns in
MSA

Towns
with LIDAC
Census
Tracts

Precentage
of Towns
with LIDACs

Total
Census
Tracts
within MSA

Number
of LIDAC
Census
Tracts

Percentage
of LIDAC
Census
Tracts

MA

136

49

36%

1013

406

40%

NH

31

10

32%

110

68

62%

TOTAL

167

59

35%

1123

474

42%

Towns with LIDAC Census Tracts
Massachusetts

New Hampshire

Abington

Milford

Derry

Acton

Milton

Hudson

Ashland

Natick

Kingston

Beverly

Newton

Londonderry

Billerica

Norwood

Merrimack

Boston

Peabody

Milford

Braintree

Plymouth

Nashua

Bridgewater

Quincy

Pelham

Brockton

Randolph

Salem

Brookline

Revere

Seabrook

Cambridge

Salem

Chelsea

Somerville

132

Towns with LIDAC Census Tracts
Massachusetts

New Hampshire

Danvers

Stoneham

Dedham

Stoughton

Everett

Swampscott

Framingham

Tewksbury

Gloucester

Walpole

Haverhill

Waltham

Holbrook

Watertown

Lawrence

Weymouth

Lowell

Winchester

Lynn

Winthrop

Malden

Woburn

Marlborough
Medford
Methuen

133

Appendix D.
Other Funding Available

134

Buildings
Technical Assistance for Building Decarbonization
• (Federal Rebate) High-Efficiency Electric Home Rebate Program: Covers 100 percent of
electrification project costs for low-income households (who earn less than 80 percent of their
Area Median Income) and 50 percent of costs for moderate-income households (who earn
between 80 and 150 percent of their Area Median Income. A State energy office may use up to
20% of awarded funds for planning, administration, or technical assistance.
• (Federal) Building Codes Implementation for Efficiency and Resilience Program: Designed
to create or enable state or regional partnerships to provide training and materials to—(i)
builders, contractors and subcontractors, architects, and other design and construction
professionals, relating to meeting updated building energy codes in a cost-effective manner; and
(ii) building code officials, relating to improving implementation of and compliance with building
energy codes; (B) to collect and disseminate quantitative data on construction and codes
implementation, including code pathways, performance metrics, and technologies used; (C) to
develop and implement a plan for highly effective codes implementation, including measuring
compliance; (D) to address various implementation needs in rural, suburban, and urban areas;
and (E) to implement updates in energy codes for— (i) new residential and commercial buildings
(including multifamily buildings); and (ii) additions and alterations to existing residential and
commercial buildings (including multifamily buildings).
• (MA) MassCEC Building Electrification and Transformation Accelerator (BETA): Pilot program
to develop a decarbonization assessment process for commercial buildings larger than 20,000
square feet and multifamily buildings with 15 units or more. The program will provide in-depth
building audits to help plan electrification and decarbonization retrofits.
• (MA) MassCEC EmPower Massachusetts: Provides funding to communities and communitybased organization to explore, develop, and implement program models or projects that provide
access to the benefits of clean energy for previously underserved populations.
• (MA) Mass Save Programs: Provides services, rebates, incentives, training, and information to
improve energy efficiency.
• (NH) New Hampshire Saves Program: Provides electric and natural gas customers with
information, incentives, and support designed to save energy and reduce costs.

Financial Assistance for Building Decarbonization
• (Federal) Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant Program: Allows for grants to
nonprofit organizations and governmental agencies for the purpose of performing energy
efficiency retrofits.
• (Federal) Solar for All: EPA will award up to 60 grants to states, territories, Tribal governments,
municipalities, and eligible nonprofits to expand the number of low-income and disadvantaged
communities primed for residential solar investment—enabling millions of low-income
households to access affordable, resilient, and clean solar energy.
• (Federal) Inflation Reduction Act Tax Credits for Energy Efficiency: Provides tax credits and
deductions for clean energy and energy efficiency equipment.

135

• (Federal) Green and Resilient Retrofit Program (GRRP): Provides funding for direct loans and
grants to fund projects that improve energy or water efficiency, enhance indoor air quality or
sustainability, implement the use of zero-emissions electricity generation, low-emission building
materials or processes, energy storage, or building electrification strategies, or address climate
resilience, of eligible HUD-assisted multifamily properties.
• (Federal) Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund: Provides funding to deliver lower energy costs and
economic revitalization to communities through the National Clean Investment Fund, Clean
Communities Investment Accelerator, and the Solar for All competition.
• (Federal) US Department of Treasury Capital Management Fund: Awards grants to Community
development financial institutions (CDFIs) and non-profit affordable housing organizations to
finance affordable housing solutions and community revitalization efforts that benefit individuals
and families with low-incomes and low-income communities.
• (MA) Income-Eligible LEAN Deep Energy Retrofit: Provides incentives for retrofits of incomeeligible multifamily buildings to reduce site EUI by at least 40%.
• (MA) Low- and Moderate-Income Decarbonization Program: Funds decarbonization retrofits of
existing low- or moderate-income residential buildings.
• (MA) Mass Save Programs: Provides services, rebates, incentives, training, and information to
improve energy efficiency.
• (MA) Weatherization Assistance Program: Provides LIHEAP-eligible households with
energy efficiency services. Typical work includes air sealing, attic and/or sidewall insulation,
weatherstripping and minor repairs associated with the weatherization installed measures.
• (MA) MassCEC Equity Workforce Planning and Capacity Grants: Provides grants of up to
$30,000 to develop a program plan ready for implementation and grants of up to $150,000 for
capacity building to start or expand a clean energy equity workforce program.
• (MA) Commonwealth Corporation Workforce Training Funding Program: Provides resources to
Massachusetts businesses to fund training for current and newly hired employees.
• (MA) HousingWorks Sustainable and Green Housing Initiatives: Consolidates the Transit
Oriented Housing Program and the Climate Resilient Housing Program to accelerate and unlock
new housing through, for example, office conversions and development of modular homes.
• (MA) Affordable Housing Trust Fund: Provides resources to governmental subdivisions,
community development corporations, local housing authorities, community action agencies,
community-based or neighborhood-based non-profit housing organizations, non-profit
organizations, for-profit entities, and private employers to create or preserve affordable housing.
• (MA) MassHousing Climate Ready Housing Program: Funds projects to dramatically reduce
carbon emissions and improve health of residents of affordable housing buildings.
• (MA) MassHousing Neighborhood Stabilization Program: Provides capital grant funds for
redevelopment, reconstruction, renovation, or repair of substandard properties.
• (NH) New Hampshire Saves Program: Provides electric and natural gas customers with
information, incentives, and support designed to save energy and reduce costs.

136

Net-Zero Municipal Buildings
• (Federal) Community Facilities Direct Loan & Grant Program: Provides affordable funding to
develop essential community facilities in rural areas. An essential community facility is defined
as a facility that provides an essential service to the local community for the orderly development
of the community in a primarily rural area, and does not include private, commercial or business
undertakings.
• (Federal) Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant Program: Funding for development,
implementation, and installation on or in any government building of the eligible entity of onsite
renewable energy technology that generates electricity from renewable resources, including—
(A) solar energy; (B) wind energy; (C) fuel cells; and (D) biomass.
• (Federal) Grant Funding to Address Indoor Air Pollution at Schools: Provides funding to
monitor and reduce GHG emissions and other air pollutants at K-12 schools in low-income and
disadvantaged communities.
• (Federal) Elective Pay: Allows tax-exempt and governmental entities to receive the full value of
clean energy investment and production tax credits.
• (MA) Community Compact Program: A community will agree to implement at least one best
practice that they select from across a variety of areas. The community’s chosen best practice(s)
will be reviewed between the Commonwealth and the municipality to ensure that the best
practice(s) chosen are unique to the municipality and reflect needed areas of improvement. The
Greenhouse gas reduction and renewable energy best practice area requires that a community
participate in programs offered by DOER's Green Communities Division to reduce energy use,
cut GHG emissions attributed to buildings and vehicles, increase renewable energy, and adopt
building codes that support energy efficiency and electrification in new construction and major
renovations.
• (MA) Mass Save Programs: Provides services, rebates, incentives, training, and information to
improve energy efficiency.
• (MA) Green Communities Climate Leader Communities Programs: Helps municipalities reduce
emissions by electrifying non-electric energy uses and maximizing the efficiency of buildings and
transportation.
• (MA) Massachusetts School Building Authority: Provides funding to municipalities to support
the design and construction of educationally-appropriate, flexible, sustainable, and cost-effective
public school facilities.
• (MA/NH) Energy Performance or Energy Service Contracts: Offered by energy service
companies, which are commercial business or nonprofits that provide a range of energy
solutions, including design and implementation of energy-saving project, to guarantee energy
savings for the customer (often government and nonprofit entities).
• (NH) Community Development Finance Authority’s Clean Energy Fund: Provides technical and
financial resources for municipalities, businesses, and non-profits to invest in energy efficiency
improvements and renewable energy projects.
• (NH) Community Facilities Energy Assessment Program: Provides grant funding to reduce the
cost of energy-related studies for New Hampshire municipalities and non-profit organizations.

137

District Scale Renewable Thermal Energy Projects
• (Federal Tax Credit) Residential Clean Energy Tax Credit: Qualified expenses include the costs of
new clean energy property including geothermal heat pumps.
• (Federal Rebate) High-Efficiency Electric Home Rebate Program: Covers 100 percent of
electrification project costs for low-income households (who earn less than 80 percent of their
Area Median Income) and 50 percent of costs for moderate-income households (who earn
between 80 and 150 percent of their Area Median Income.
• (MA) Community Compact: A community will receive funding when they agree to implement at
least one best practice that they select from across a variety of areas. The community’s chosen
best practice(s) will be reviewed between the Commonwealth and the municipality to ensure
that the best practice(s) chosen are unique to the municipality and reflect needed areas of
improvement. The Greenhouse gas reduction and renewable energy best practice requires that
a municipality participate in programs offered by DOER's Green Communities Division to reduce
energy use, cut GHG emissions attributed to buildings and vehicles, increase renewable energy,
and adopt building codes that support energy efficiency and electrification in new construction
and major renovations.
• (MA) MassCEC Kickstart Massachusetts: Provides grants of up to $50k to communities to
assess potential sites for networked geothermal projects.

Transportation
Public Transit Affordability and Accessibility
• (Federal) All Stations Accessibility Program: Eligible activities are capital projects to upgrade
the accessibility of legacy rail fixed guideway public transportation systems for people with
disabilities, including those who use wheelchairs, by increasing the number of existing stations
or facilities for passenger use that meet or exceed the new construction standards of title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
• (Federal) Better Utilizing Investments to Leverage Development (BUILD) Transportation Grants
Program: Funds investments in transportation infrastructure, including transit.
• (Federal) Capital Investment Grant Program: Funds transit capital investments, including heavy
rail, commuter rail, light rail, streetcars, and bus rapid transit. Includes the New Starts, Small
Starts, and Core Capacity Improvement Programs.
• (Federal) Enhanced Mobility of Seniors & Individuals with Disabilities: Provides formula funding
to meet the transportation needs of older adults and people with disabilities when transportation
service is unavailable or insufficient.
• (Federal) Low or No Emissions Grant Program: Provides funds for state and local authorities
to purchase or lease zero-emission and low-emissions transit buses and acquire, construct, or
lease required supporting facilities.
• (Federal) Mobility, Access & Transportation Insecurity (MATI): Creating Links to Opportunity
Research and Demonstration Program: Provides funding and support to explore strategies to
improve people’s mobility and access to daily needs and evaluate outcomes and impacts upon
individuals and communities.

138

• (Federal) Public Transportation Innovation Grant Program: Provides funding to develop
innovative products and services assisting transit agencies in better meeting the needs of their
customers. Eligible recipients may include universities, public transportation systems, state
DOTs, non-profit and for-profit entities.
• (MA) Community Transit Grant Program: All projects must center the needs of older adults
and people with disabilities, and all projects must respond to a need identified in your region's
Coordinated Human Service Transportation Plan. Eligible applicants can apply for funding to
operate transportation services, support mobility management initiatives, or receive wheelchairaccessible vehicles.
• (MA) Complete Streets Program: provides technical assistance and construction funding to
eligible municipalities. Eligible municipalities must pass a Complete Streets Policy and develop
a Prioritization Plan. Currently, 290 of 351 municipalities have registered and 243 have approved
plans. Project types include transit station/stop access Improvements like curb ramps, bus
shelters, bike parking, Park & Ride, etc.
• (MA administered) Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): Municipalities can apply
for public social services funding to offer free or reduced-fare rides to low-income individuals.
Wareham used funds to offer discounted dial-a-ride fares, bus passes, and out-of-town medical
transportation to low-income seniors.
• (MA) Regional Transit Innovation Grant: Can be used to enhance and expand existing transit
services; implement new and innovative transit services; expand service hours or weekend
service; improve rural connectivity; improve connectivity across regional transit service areas;
transit electrification; and/or operating and capital expenses.
• (MA) Shared Streets and Spaces Grant Program: Provides funding to municipalities and public
transit authorities to quickly implement improvements to plazas, sidewalks, curbs, streets, bus
stops, parking areas, and other public spaces in support of public health, safe mobility, and
strengthened commerce.
• (MA) State Transportation Improvement Program: All federally-funded roadway and transit
projects in Massachusetts. Includes projects such as bicycle paths, bridges, roadways,
sidewalks, and transit improvements.
• (NH) Statewide Transportation Improvement Program: Four-year plan that provides details about
federally-funded transportation projects that are being implemented in New Hampshire.

Multi-Modal Transportation
• (Federal) Advanced Transportation Technologies and Innovative Mobility Deployment: Provides
funding to deploy, install, and operate advanced transportation technologies to improve safety,
mobility, efficiency, system performance, intermodal connectivity, and infrastructure return on
investment including for advanced traveler information systems.
• (Federal) Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement (CMAQ) Program: Provides a
funding source for State and local governments to fund transportation projects and programs to
help meet the requirements of the Clean Air Act. Uses include bicycle and pedestrian facilities,
shared micromobility projects including shared scooter systems, and more.
• (Federal) Neighborhood Access and Equity Grant Program: provides opportunities to redress the
legacy of harm from transportation infrastructure including: construction-related displacement,
environmental degradation, limited access to goods and services, degraded public health due to

139

air and noise pollution, limited opportunities for physical activity, and hampered economic vitality
of the surrounding community. The Community Planning Grants portion of this program are
for eligible feasibility studies of removing, retrofitting, or mitigating an existing facility to restore
community connectivity or and other transportation planning activities. The Capital Construction
Grants fund the replacement of an eligible facility with a new facility that restores community
connectivity.
• (Federal) Rebuilding American Infrastructure with Sustainability and Equity (RAISE) Program:
Provides funds to plan and construct surface transportation infrastructure projects that will
improve safety, environmental sustainability, quality of life, mobility and community connectivity,
economic competitiveness and opportunity including tourism, state of good repair, partnership
and collaboration, and innovation.
• (Federal) Safe Streets and Roads for All (SS4A) Grant Program: Implementation grants provide
Federal funds to implement projects and strategies to address a roadway safety problem.
Projects and strategies can be infrastructure, behavioral, and/or operational activities.
• (Federal) The Transportation Alternatives (TA) Set-Aside: Provides funding for a variety
of generally smaller-scale transportation projects such as pedestrian and bicycle facilities
development.
• (MA) Complete Streets Program: Provides technical assistance and construction funding to
eligible municipalities. Eligible municipalities must pass a Complete Streets Policy and develop
a Prioritization Plan. Currently, 290 of 351 municipalities have registered and 243 have approved
plans. Project types include pedestrian and bike network connections, among others.
• (MA) Shared Streets and Spaces Grant Program: Provides funding to municipalities and public
transit authorities to quickly implement improvements to plazas, sidewalks, curbs, streets, bus
stops, parking areas, and other public spaces in support of public health, safe mobility, and
strengthened commerce.
• (NH) Complete Streets Program: Provides technical assistance and construction funding to
ensure safe access, convenience, and comfortable travel for pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists,
and transit riders of all ages and abilities.

EV Affordability
An additional EV Funding Resource can be found here
• (Federal Tax Credit) Credits for new clean vehicles: Buyers may qualify for a credit up to $7,500 if
you buy a new, qualified plug-in EV or fuel cell electric vehicle (FCV)
• (Federal Tax Credit) Alternative Fuel Infrastructure Tax Credit (IRS) EV: For charging
infrastructure installed through December 31, 2032, is eligible for a tax credit of 30 percent of the
cost, not to exceed $100,000. Eligible fueling equipment must be installed in census tracts where
the poverty rate is at least 20 percent, or the median family income is less than 80 percent of the
State median family income level.
• (MA tax credit) MOR-EV Rebate Program: This program aims to reduce air pollution and
greenhouse gas emissions and support greater adoption of electric vehicles across the
Commonwealth by offering rebates to consumers (residents, corporations, and other entities)
who register their on-road zero emission vehicles in Massachusetts. MOR-EV provides rebates
for the purchase or lease of eligible battery electric vehicles and fuel-cell electric vehicles,
including passenger cars and medium- and heavy-duty trucks and other vehicle types. The
program also offers rebates for used EVs and a rebate adder for income-qualifying residents.
140

EV Charging
Additional potential federal charging grants can be found here
• (Federal) Charging and Fueling Infrastructure Grant Program: provides funding to strategically
deploy publicly accessible electric vehicle charging infrastructure and other alternative fueling
infrastructure. This grant program has two tracks: Corridor Charging (deploy electric vehicle
charging in designated corridors) and Community Charging (develop infrastructure for public
roads, schools, parks, and in publicly accessible parking facilities).
• (Federal) Energy Storage Demonstration and Pilot Grant Program DOE is directed to fund three
energy storage demonstration projects by September 30, 2023 and establish a separate pilot
grant program. Eligible uses include integrating fast charging of electric vehicles.
• (Federal) Advanced Transportation Technologies and Innovative Mobility Deployment: Provides
funding to deploy, install, and operate advanced transportation technologies to improve safety,
mobility, efficiency, system performance, intermodal connectivity, and infrastructure return on
investment including Integration of intelligent transportation systems with the smart grid and
other energy distribution and charging systems.
• (Federal Formula Funds) National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Formula Program: Provides
funding to States to strategically deploy electric vehicle (EV) charging infrastructure and to
establish an interconnected network to facilitate data collection, access, and reliability. The
acquisition and installation of electric vehicle charging infrastructure to serve as a catalyst for
the deployment of such infrastructure and to connect it to a network to facilitate data collection,
access, and reliability.
• (Federal) Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement (CMAQ) Program: Provides a
funding source for State and local governments to fund transportation projects and programs
to help meet the requirements of the Clean Air Act. Uses include procuring electric vehicles and
charging stations.
• (Federal Financing) Transportation Infrastructure Financing and Innovation Act (TIFIA): Provides
credit assistance for qualified projects of regional and national significance. Any type of project
that is eligible for Federal assistance through existing surface transportation programs (highway
projects and transit capital projects) is eligible for the TIFIA credit program. An eligible project
must be included in the applicable State Transportation Improvement Program.
• (MA) Community Compact Program: is a voluntary, mutual agreement entered into between the
Healey-Driscoll Administration and individual cities and towns of the Commonwealth, which will
result in the implementation of at least one best practice that they select from across a variety of
areas. The Resilient & Reliable Transportation best practice requires that a municipality facilitate
increased use of electric vehicles and related infrastructure. Plans could include upgrades to
the electric grid, analyses of charging station needs, installation of charging infrastructure, and
replacement of gas or diesel municipal vehicles with electric vehicles when feasible.
• (MA) MassEVIP Public Access Charging Incentives: Is one of several MassDEP rolling grant
programs aimed at making electric vehicles (EVs) and EV charging stations more widely available
across Massachusetts. provides incentives for property owners or managers with publicly
accessible parking to acquire and install Level 1 and Level 2 EV charging stations. Funds up to
100% of government owned locations and up to 80% at all other locations.

141

Electricity Generation
Renewable Energy Projects
• (Federal) Energy Storage Demonstration and Pilot Grant Program DOE is directed to fund three
energy storage demonstration projects by September 30, 2023 and establish a separate pilot
grant program. Eligible uses include integrating renewable energy resource production.
• (Federal) Solar for All: EPA will award up to 60 grants to states, territories, Tribal governments,
municipalities, and eligible nonprofits to expand the number of low-income and disadvantaged
communities primed for residential solar investment—enabling millions of low-income
households to access affordable, resilient, and clean solar energy.
• (MA) Community Compact: A community will receive funding when they agree to implement at
least one best practice that they select from across a variety of areas. The community’s chosen
best practice(s) will be reviewed between the Commonwealth and the municipality to ensure
that the best practice(s) chosen are unique to the municipality and reflect needed areas of
improvement. The Greenhouse gas reduction and renewable energy best practice requires that
a municipality participate in programs offered by DOER's Green Communities Division to reduce
energy use, cut GHG emissions attributed to buildings and vehicles, increase renewable energy,
and adopt building codes that support energy efficiency and electrification in new construction
and major renovations.
• (NH) Renewable Energy Fund: Provides funds through renewable energy rebate programs or
competitive grant solicitations, including residential and commercial and industrial solar and
renewable energy rebates and low/moderate-income community solar programs.
• (NH) Residential Renewable Electrical Generation Rebate Program: Provides rebates to NH
residents who install PV or wind turbine electrical generation systems.
• (NH) Commercial & Industrial Solar Incentive Program: Provides incentives to commercial and
industrial businesses that install new solar electric or thermal facilities.

Municipal Aggregation
• (Federal Tax Credit) Elective Pay: The IRA includes a provision that, in lieu of tax credits, makes
a direct payment option available to non-taxable entities investing in and producing clean energy.
Municipalities, along with entities such as water and school districts, will have access to a direct
payment option applicable to tax years 2023 through 2032. Direct pay will be available through
the following Production Tax Credit and Investment Tax Credit programs:
• Renewable Electricity Production Tax Credit • Energy Investment Tax Credit
• Carbon Capture and Sequestration Tax Credit
• Advanced Energy Project Credit
• Nuclear Power Production Tax Credit
• Clean Electricity Investment Tax Credit
• Clean Hydrogen Production Tax Credit
• Commercial Clean Vehicle Credit

142

• Advanced Manufacturing Production Tax Credit
• Alternative Fuel Refueling Property Credit
• Clean Electricity Production Tax Credit
• Clean Fuel Production Credit

Waste
• (Federal) Solid Waste Infrastructure Recycling Grant Program: Provides grants to improve
post-consumer materials management and infrastructure; support improvements to local postconsumer materials management and recycling programs; and assist local waste management
authorities in making improvements to local waste management systems.
• (Federal) Consumer Recycling Education and Outreach Grant Program: Provides funding
for projects that will inform the public about residential or community recycling or composting
programs, provide information about the materials that are accepted as part of residential or
community recycling or composting programs, and increase collection rates and decrease
contamination across the nation.
• (MA) Efficiency and Regionalization Grant Program: Provides financial support for governmental
entities interested in implementing regionalization and other efficiency initiatives that allow for
long-term sustainability.
• (MA) Sustainable Materials Recovery Program (SMRP) Municipal Grants: Supports local
recycling, composting/organics, reuse, source reduction, policy development and enforcement
activities that increase diversion and reduce disposal.
• (MA) SMRP Recycling Dividends Program (RDP): Provides payments to municipalities that have
implemented specific programs and policies proven to maximize reuse, recycling, and waste
reduction.
• (MA) Reduce, Reuse, Repair Micro-Grants: Provides grants of up to $5,000 to municipalities,
regional authorities, and eligible organizations for short-term waste reduction projects.
• (MA) Recycling & Reuse Business Development Grants: Helps Massachusetts recycling
processors and manufacturers create sustainable markets for eligible materials.
• (NH) Unlined Municipal Landfill & Incinerator Closure Grant Program: Provides reimbursement
to municipalities for 20% of the eligible costs associated with the closure of an unlined landfill
and/or incinerator.
• (NH) Municipal Recycling and Storage Equipment Grants: Provides funds to assist with the
purchase of recycling equipment.

143

Appendix E.
Stakeholder and Community
Engagement Summary

144

Justice40 Advisory Group Survey | January 2024
Ahead of the first meeting, MAPC asked advisory group members to share their priorities for GHG
reduction measures in the Buildings, Power Generation, and Transportation sectors.

Electricity
Generation

Buildings

Transportation

The advisory group members mentioned several priorities related to solar,
including incorporating rooftop solar into existing low-income energy efficiency and
weatherization programs, exploring programs to increase rooftop solar in low-income
communities (potentially through shared solar), and partnering with institutions like
hospitals to host community solar. Members also highlighted the need to potentially
subsidize the cost of renewable power generation for low-income households and
implement “one bill” community solar arrangements. Members highlighted measures
like increasing grid redundancy, mitigating air pollution, developing easily accessible
funding opportunities to support energy democracy projects in environmental justice
communities, and creating high-quality job opportunities for BIPOC, low-income, and
previously incarcerated community members.
The advisory group members suggested potential measures involving financial and
technical assistance for building decarbonization and resilience upgrades for lowincome households with a focus on subsidizing installation and operating costs of
electrification measures to avoid increasing energy burden while keeping housing
affordable. Members cited examples like BERDO and Portland’s PCEF as potential
funding measures, and recommended expansion of Mass Save funding for retrofits.
Members also recommended expedited permitting for affordable passive house
construction and potential transit-oriented zoning changes.
Advisory group members suggested measures to encourage mode shift away from
cars and reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled, including transit-oriented zoning and complete
streets infrastructure investments. Related to EV adoption, members recommended
expanding on-street and multifamily EV charging, subsidizing the cost of charger
installations for low-income households, developing car sharing models, and improving
communication about available EV resources and funding to BIPOC communities
and indigenous tribes. Members highlighted the need to expand public transportation
service and reliability, including in gateway cities and throughout Cape Cod, reduce
public transportation costs, electrify the MBTA, and fund pilots to electrify ambulances
traveling through environmental justice communities.

145

Justice40 Advisory Group Meeting 1 | January 8, 2024
The Justice40 Advisory Group shared their feedback on the draft list of 20 measures.

Electricity
Generation

Buildings

Transportation

On the renewable energy measure, advisory group members highlighted the
importance of on-bill financing for community solar projects. Members also identified
a need for programs that increase rooftop solar in low-income communities, more
effectively share information about solar opportunities, and pair upgrades with
electrification to offset costs of switching from gas to heat pumps. Municipalities
might consider partnerships with large institutions like hospitals, which could host
microgrids or community solar. For the municipal aggregation measure, advisory
group members suggested incentivizing municipalities to increase the percentage of
low-income households enrolled and providing additional support to municipalities
navigating the DPU filing process. For district energy projects, advisory group members
recommended establishing clear pathways for community-based organizations to
partner with municipalities on projects, exploring zoning changes necessary to pursue
district energy projects, and focusing on wind and solar.
For financial assistance for building decarbonization, advisory group members built
on previous comments that electrification should be fully subsidized for low- and
medium-income owners and tenants, adding that funding must be easy to access, this
measure must explicitly involve landlords, and this measure should incorporate barrier
mitigation and resiliency measures. For the technical assistance measure, members
recommended offering free heat pump coaching and providing more detailed estimates
to households of the costs of electrification and potential solar savings. In discussions
about rental energy disclosure and home energy ratings, advisory group members
commented that this must be coupled with green leases or other measures to ensure
housing stays affordable. For measures related to specialized energy code adoption,
advisory group members said there needs to also be local funding and zoning relief.
For measures related to municipal net-zero carbon standards, members encouraged
municipalities to incorporate parking and transit access into standards.
In terms of multimodal transportation, advisory group members recommended
that micromobility options be well integrated into public transit. In terms of public
transportation reliability and service, advisory group members recommended that
municipalities collaborate with transportation entities and also improve municipalowned facilities like bus stops. For municipal fleet electrification, advisory group
members recommended exploring electrifying ambulances and focusing municipal
electrification in municipalities with environmental justice communities. For EV
expansion (vehicles and charging), members emphasized the need for better
engagement strategies and partnerships with CBOs and for consideration of subsidies
for EVs and hybrids for low-income and rural households.

146

Justice40 Advisory Group Meeting 2 | January 30, 2024
For each of the 10 selected measures, the Municipal Advisory Group members recommended who they
think should be involved, anticipated barriers, and how they think this measure can be designed for
equitable implementation.

Electricity
Generation

Buildings

Transportation

For the renewable energy measure, advisory group members recommended involving
construction unions, safety net health systems and hospitals, contractors, vocational
schools, mobile home communities, and public housing authorities, and identified
potential barriers, including the logistics of community solar in dense neighborhoods
and lack of education and awareness about community solar. For the municipal
aggregation measure, advisory group members recommended involving housing
authorities, police departments, and schools, and identified barriers including opt-in
defaults and third-party suppliers. For thermal energy projects, advisory group members
recommended focusing on dense urban communities with multifamily housing,
particularly where decarbonization costs are a barrier, and income-eligible residents.
Advisory group members highlighted a range of barriers, including a lack of skilled labor,
the need for cultural monitoring to protect ancient sites, and laws including the National
Environmental Policy Act, National Historic Preservation Act, the American Indian
Religious Freedom Act, the Indian Development Act, and Executive Order 13007 on
Indian Sacred Sites.
For the technical assistance for building decarbonization measure, advisory
group members recommended collaboration with grassroots community-based
organizations, unions with climate initiatives, first-time homebuyer assistance
programs, and Community First Partnership communities. Advisory group members
also encouraged a neighborhood-scale approach to decarbonization and the need to
simultaneously improve health and safety and identified barriers including Mass Save’s
focus on energy efficiency rather than decarbonization, lack of funding for moderateincome households, and deferred maintenance. They highlighted the need to pair
decarbonization efforts with solar to reduce energy burdens. For the financial assistance
for building decarbonization measure, advisory group members recommended
collaboration with vocational schools, landlords, labor groups, and cultural and interest
groups and identified barriers and highlighted the need to learn from past efforts, such
as the Green Justice Coalition. For the net-zero municipal buildings measure, advisory
group members recommended collaboration with the MA School Building Authority,
unions, and MassCEC.
For the public transit and affordability and accessibility measure, advisory group
members said systematically excluded populations should be prioritized and
highlighted that an MBTA low-income fare is in the works. Members cited barriers
such as needing to build authentic trust-based relationships with community
members and accountability in existing structures. For the multimodal transportation
measure, advisory group members recommended collaboration with existing bike
share programs, bike give outs in New Hampshire, and organizations who work with
community members living with disabilities and said that time of use restrictions on bike
paths and lack of bike lock infrastructure are barriers. For the EV affordability measure,
advisory group members suggested rebates for hybrids and not just electric vehicles
for low-income or rural households. For the EV charging measure, advisory group
members said measures should focus on public housing and multifamily housing and
engage private parking owners and landlords. Aging infrastructure, misconceptions
around EVs, language barriers in outreach, and tension around parking space were
cited as concerns.
147

Justice40 Advisory Group Meeting 3 | February 15, 2024
Electricity
Generation,
Waste,
Transportation,
Buildings

During the third meeting, advisory group members reviewed the draft PCAP measures
and provided specific track changes and comments.

Municipal Advisory Group Meeting 1 | November 20, 2023
The Municipal Advisory Group shared their current work and priorities for the near future and identified key
co-benefits (e.g. public health benefits) that they would like to see reflected in the measures.
Advisory group members highlighted the need for regional technical assistance
and matching funding for municipal and non-municipal decarbonization, dedicated
Decarbonization staff at housing authorities, funding to address renter-landlord split
incentives, and funding for pre-weatherization barriers.
Buildings
Advisory group members highlighted the need for improved shared transportation
options, increased awareness about public transportation, subsidies for public
transportation, and coordinated, strategic network of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations.
Transportation
Advisory group members highlighted the need for regional technical assistance for
battery storage, support for Municipal Light Plants’ efforts, improved infrastructure
planning for grid capacity, and additional resources to increase solar adoption in lowincome households and reduce energy burden.
Electricity
Generation

148

Municipal Advisory Group Meeting 2 | January 9, 2024
The Municipal Advisory Group shared their feedback on the draft list of 20 measures.

Buildings

Transportation

Electricity
Generation

Misc.

For measures related to financial and technical assistance for building decarbonization,
advisory group members encouraged the measure coordinate with existing Mass
Save and DOER Climate Leaders programs, include funding for pre-weatherization
barriers, create one place or “hub” to store all relevant information, prioritize small
businesses and mixed-use buildings, and compel landlords to participate and provide
funding specific to rental properties. For measures related to municipal decarbonization
and net zero carbon standards, advisory group members highlighted the need for
additional assistance related to direct pay and tax credits, guidance on messaging,
coordination with the Climate Leaders Community Program, and collaboration with the
Massachusetts School Building Authority. Advisory group members raised concerns
about a measure to require rental energy disclosure, expressing that this would need to
be coupled with requirements to not raise rents and heavily involve landlords
For measures related to multimodal transportation, advisory group members
highlighted the need to fill gaps in the existing Blue Bike program and address zoning
barriers. Advisory group members supported the fare free transportation measure
and encouraged free fares for high school students and others. For municipal fleet
electrification measures, advisory group members highlighted the need for additional
state and federal funding for electric school buses and pilots for electrifying heavy duty
vehicles. Advisory group members said that EV charging measures must include efforts
to strengthen engagement with multifamily housing owners to increase direct charging
capacity for renters, centralize and standardize ongoing costs of operating the network,
and create alternative, non-municipal ownership models. Advisory group members also
highlighted the need to reduce parking requirements, conduct air quality monitoring,
and advocate for more MBTA funding.
For measures related to renewable energy, advisory group members recommended
incorporating battery storage, providing more technical assistance for low-income
community solar programs, and providing support to municipalities to ensure use of
available tax credits. For measures related to municipal aggregation, advisory group
members emphasized the need to build out transmission infrastructure simultaneously,
involve Municipal Light Plants in discussions, and consider the impacts of 100%
renewable energy by default policies on costs to residents. For measures related to
utility collaboration and district energy, advisory group members flagged that this
measure may take too long to implement on the CPRG timeline and recommended
seeking alternative funding sources and establishing longer term collaborations with
utilities.
Across measures, advisory group members highlighted the importance of workforce
development. Members recommended coordination with CAP agencies, development
of vocational programs in Environmental Justice communities, and increased regional
shared services and information sharing between small municipalities with less
capacity.

149

Municipal Advisory Group Meeting 3 | February 6, 2024
For each of the 11 selected measures, the Municipal Advisory Group members recommended who they
think should be involved and how they think this measure can be designed for equitable implementation. In
mid-February, Advisory Group members also provided specific track changes and comments on the draft
measures.

Buildings

Transportation

For the draft technical assistance for building decarbonization measure, advisory group
members recommended collaboration with landlords, contractors, and CAPs, and
cited community-based energy coach programs, Electrify Cambridge, and other local
programs as ongoing successful approaches. Advisory group members highlighted
barriers to implementation including: split incentive challenges, lack of education and
capacity around Mass Save programs, limited financing, the need for rent increase
safeguards, and lack of contractor training. For the draft financial assistance for building
decarbonization measure, advisory group members recommended collaboration
with Mass Save, LEAN, housing authorities and other major developers of housing
and identified barriers to implementation including the slow timeline of some Mass
Save funding, the lack of capacity to take advantage of incentives, and the limits
of ratepayer funding. For the draft net-zero municipal buildings measure, advisory
group members recommended collaboration with MassCEC, DOER, and utilities.
Members cited barriers including the need for more financial planning and instruments
for municipalities, lack of workforce development, insufficient funding for retrofits,
constantly changing funding context, varying local support, and others.
For the public transit affordability and accessibility measure, advisory group members
encouraged collaboration with RTAs, TMAs, employers, and startups working
on wayfinding products but saw barriers with the unreliable nature of underlying
infrastructure and differences between suburban and urban contexts. For the multimodal transportation measure, advisory group members encouraged regional
coordination on regional assets (e.g. bike trail). For the EV affordability measure,
advisory group members cited supply chain issues as a barrier. For the EV charging
measure, advisory group members cited barriers including reliability concerns,
municipal bottlenecks, and mismatches in the number of cars vs. chargers.
For the draft municipal aggregation measure, advisory group members recommended
collaboration with the Department of Public Utilites and investor-owned utilities, and
cited delays in DPU rulings as a barrier.

Electricity
Generation
Within the waste sector, advisory group members cited several successful existing
projects including a regional composting facility in Essex, municipal transfer stations,
tool libraries and swap sheds, and more. The group cited the costs and availability of
glass recycling and plastic bags contaminating recycling as barriers.
Waste

150

Listening Session 2 and 3 | January 24 and 25, 2024
Attendees provided input on the 10 selected measures, including their ideas for implementation partners,
equitable implementation, barriers, and necessary enabling actions.
Note: Input from the first listening session is summarized in the Public Listening Sessions section.

Electricity
Generation

Buildings

For the renewable energy measure, attendees identified lack of capacity in small
communities, confusing program requirements, and limited land availability as barriers.
They recommended this measure include outreach programs about community solar,
consider siting solar on the land in highway medians, incorporate community benefits
agreements, include MLPs, and more. Key partners would include consultants,
MLPs, solar co-ops, utilities, solar developer companies, financiers and bankers, and
universities. DPU would also need to address its policies around transmission lines
to make this measure successful. For the municipal aggregation proposal, attendees
identified the long time required for approval and price spikes as barriers. Participants
emphasized the need to incorporate technical assistance and financial assistance for
CBOs with relationships in EJ communities and to integrate education about benefits
of municipal aggregation and energy scams. They also recommended incorporating
solar installations into this measure and providing specific support for low-income
communities to “opt-up.” For the measure related to district thermal energy, participants
said lack of understanding, technology immaturity, and the need to make large
infrastructure upgrades (including digging up roads) are barriers. They emphasized
the need to incorporate workforce development into this measure and specifically
incorporate labor unions.
For the measure related to technical assistance for building decarbonization, attendees
recommended that the measure design reflect key learnings from Mass Save’s
Community First Partnership (CFP) program, incorporate remediation of health factors
like lead, and center procedural justice. For the measure related to financial assistance
for building decarbonization, attendees identified a range of potential implementation
barriers, including renter-landlord split incentives and lack of education, the high
cost of retrofits, language access, and differences in incentives in communities with
Municipal Light Plants. Attendees again recommended this measure reflect CFP
learnings, integrate closely with the technical assistance measure, reduce burdensome
paperwork, and provide a wide array of financial options for payment (direct pay, tax
incentives for landlords). Simultaneously, participants noted, the state must expand
grid capacity and ensure Mass Save programs better serve renters. For the measure
related to municipal decarbonization, attendees highlighted a need for innovative solar
solutions in light of zoning and shade limitations on installations.

151

Transportation

For the multimodal transportation measure, attendees identified barriers including
lack of data on multimodal transportation use and competition between bike paths and
parking spots. For measures related to expanded EV use and charging, participants
cited lack of outreach to municipalities and landlords, lack of general education about
EVs, costs to charge, and a limited maintenance budget as barriers to implementation.
They highlighted the need to incorporate charging for heavy duty vehicles and to
encourage coordination between internal municipal departments who might all touch
pieces of updating EV infrastructure (e.g. opportunities to make EV infrastructure
upgrades while a department is conducting sewer upgrades or other infrastructure
upgrades). Housing authorities and regional entities should be involved, they said.
For the measure related to expansion and improvement of public transportation,
participants identified barriers including insufficient infrastructure in rural communities,
lack of accessibility to T stations and bus stops, and insufficient language access
efforts. Participants recommended a range of additions to strengthen the measure,
including incorporating education measures like “transportation buddy” programs
that raise awareness of existing transit options, establishing transit advisory groups,
and expanding public transportation timing and reliability to meet the needs of service
workers and others working outside of “standard” commuter hours. They said the T
Riders Union and employers should be involved and that the region would need to see
further investments in the MBTA to make this measure successful.

152

