BUILDING

CLIMATE RESILIENT
TRANSPORTATION

CLIMATE CHANGE ALREADY DISRUPTING
U.S. TRANSPORTATION
State and regional transportation agencies across the
country are facing extreme weather events that damage
roads and bridges and cost large sums to repair, not to
mention the cost to the economy from disrupted travel.
Extreme weather events—including heat waves, drought,
tropical storms, high winds, storm surges and heavy
downpours—are becoming more frequent and severe as
the climate changes.

FHWA IS RESPONDING
These climate risks threaten the considerable federal
investment in transportation infrastructure and FHWA is
responding:
• 	FHWA issued an order committing the agency to
integrating climate risk considerations into the delivery
and stewardship of FHWA programs.
•	Climate adaptation activities are eligible for FHWA
funding, including vulnerability assessments and design
and construction of projects or features to protect assets
from damage associated with climate change.
•	FHWA’s updated emergency relief program guidance
reflects climate resilience.
•	Transportation law passed in 2012 requires states to
develop risk-based asset management plans and to
consider alternatives for facilities repeatedly needing
repair or replacement with federal funding.

•	FHWA developed tools and guidance for systematic
consideration of climate risks at transportation system
and project levels.

WHAT CAN TRANSPORTATION AGENCIES
DO TO BUILD RESILIENCE?
Know your vulnerabilities
Departments of transportation (DOTs), metropolitan planning
organizations (MPOs), and others can begin with a vulnerability
assessment for their area using FHWA’s Vulnerability
Assessment Framework, a guidebook and online resource
detailing key steps and in-practice examples. Based on
the experience of pilot projects and other work, each step
of the framework has tools, case studies, videos and other
resources associated with it. For instance, FHWA’s Climate
Data Processing Tool processes publicly available, but large
and unwieldy data sets into local temperature and precipitation
projections tailored to transportation practitioners.
Using the FHWA framework and climate data from its local
university, the Washington State Department of Transportation
(WSDOT) held workshops with maintenance and engineering
staff in all regions of the state. WSDOT asked participants,
“What keeps you up at night?” and “What happens if the
climate-related conditions get worse?” The DOT leveraged
local staff knowledge and GIS overlays of climate and asset
management data to develop a map showing road segments
at high, medium, and low vulnerability.

MN DOT

North Coast Land Conservancy.

As part of an FHWA pilot, Minnesota DOT assessed vulnerability
to climate change in two districts and analyzed adaptation options
for two facilities at high risk of flash flooding.

Oregon purchased land and removed a levee to allow flood water to
flow onto a natural floodplain. This protected the highway from flooding
and provided habitat. Oregon DOT is now conducting an FHWA-funded
pilot analyzing protection options for other vulnerable sites.

C L I M AT E
CHANGE

Transportation Agencies Using FHWA
Resources to Build Resilience
FHWA partnered with 22 climate resilience pilots in
two rounds as well as four cooperative projects in the
Gulf Coast, Northeast, Southeast, and New Mexico.
These 26 projects are shown in the map below. In
total, at FHWA’s latest count, 24 state DOTs and 30
MPOs have conducted vulnerability assessments of
the highway system to address climate change and
extreme weather events.

IOWA DOT

State DOT Pilot

Iowa DOT and local universities used global climate models
and the state’s hydrological model to project future flood
frequencies and identify bridge and roadway vulnerabilities in
two river basins. Iowa plans to integrate the information into
its real-time warning system to protect the traveling public.
The results of the pilot may also influence guidelines for the
design of bridges and culverts on Iowa’s primary highways.

MPO Pilot
Cooperative Projects

FHWA
In Albuquerque, New Mexico, FHWA partnered with the
MPO on a scenario planning process to assess the impact
of growth scenarios on climate resilience and mitigation,
along with other community goals. The project analyzed how
different scenarios performed on development in wildfire risk
areas, development in flood risk areas, water consumption,
and emissions levels. During stakeholder workshops,
participants discussed policies that would help achieve
a preferred scenario for the 2040 metropolitan
transportation plan.

San Francisco’s Metropolitan Transportation Commission
(MTC) analyzed options for protecting transportation
infrastructure, including an artificial dune or living levee
north of the Bay Bridge touchdown to protect the bridge.

In Texas, increases in heat waves, wildfires, and
droughts threaten transportation. The MPO for Austin,
TX identified areas where clay soils shrink during heat
waves and drought, cracking pavements.

EPA

CAMPO
2

M

MA DOT

PANYNJ

The Massachusetts Department of Transportation developed
high resolution computer modeling of coastal storm
inundation and risks to the Central Artery highway tunnel
system in Boston.

New Jersey’s 2011 climate pilot analysis of which roads could flood
with higher sea levels and storm surge was unfortunately validated
when Superstorm Sandy hit in October 2012. Following the storm,
FHWA partnered with the tri-state region on a multi-jurisdictional
vulnerability assessment and analysis of adaptation solutions for
particularly vulnerable assets, such as the Hugh L. Carey Tunnel
and NJ 7. Photo shows flood protection installed by the Port
Authority of NY and NJ.

Nashville MTA
Tennessee DOT conducted a multimodal vulnerability assessment
for the state, obtaining key information for asset management.
Landslides, tornados, and river flooding (such as that shown above
in 2010), are risks.

Phase I of the U.S. DOT Gulf Coast Study, completed in
2008, found that with four feet of sea level rise, 27% of
the Gulf Coast region’s major highways, 9% of rail lines,
and 72% of ports would be inundated. Gulf Coast Phase
II focused in-depth on Mobile, Alabama and developed
nationally applicable tools.

FHWA

Maryland DOT used FHWA’s Vulnerability Assessment
Scoring Tool to prioritize climate risks to bridges, culverts,
and road segments in two counties particularly exposed to
sea level rise and storm surge.

MD DOT
3

Use the transportation planning process

Agencies can prioritize “no regrets” actions that improve
resilience of assets to existing stressors, have co-benefits, or
cost little relative to the overall value of the asset. They can
build flexibility into designs to allow for changes in the future
given inevitable uncertainty regarding future emissions levels
and precise timing and severity of impacts. For example,
agencies can design flood walls that can be heightened in the
future with minimum additional expense.

The metropolitan and statewide transportation planning
process provides key opportunities for taking climate
change into account. Resilience and sustainability should
be considered early during decision-making at the systemwide level, when options and priorities are considered for
transportation investments to meet multiple community
goals. FHWA’s report, Integrating Climate Change into the
Transportation Planning Process, provides more information.

FHWA’s updated Hydraulic Engineering Circular (HEC) 25:
Highways in the Coastal Environment, includes guidance
on estimating future sea levels and storm surges along with
designing protection measures such as revetments, beach
nourishment, and bridge deck elevation. FHWA is also updating
engineering guidance on riverine areas and hydrology. Finally,
FHWA is conducting research to better pinpoint projections
for the input variables transportation engineers need when
designing infrastructure, including precipitation patterns, geohazards, and watershed sensitivity.
Operations and maintenance

Rob Kafalenos

Operations and maintenance strategies can also lessen
climate impacts on transportation. Examples include
more frequent cleaning of storm-drains, improved plans
for weather emergencies, closures and rerouting, traveler
information systems, debris removal, early warning
systems, prepositioning materials, damage repairs, and
performance monitoring. See FHWA’s white paper on this
topic and primer for more information.

FHWA staff inspects a culvert in Mobile, Alabama. The culvert meets state
standards under current conditions, but would be overtopped by a 25-yr
rainfall under wetter climate change projections, flooding the road and the
nearby Interstate highway. Using the 11-Step process, FHWA found that
to avoid flooding, the DOT could widen the culvert by adding an additional
cell to each side ($1.7 million cost, $6 million benefit). Alternatively, the DOT
could replace the existing culvert with the largest crossing that will fit within the
available space ($2.5 million cost, $6.5 million benefit).

Incorporate climate risks into design and asset
management
Transportation agencies can consider climate change
impacts when planning new assets or rehabilitating existing
assets, especially as part of strategic asset management
efforts. Risk-based asset management serves as a climate
adaptation strategy by providing a platform for inventorying
assets, evaluating risks to those assets, and prioritizing
capital improvements.

CO DOT

Agencies can use FHWA’s 11-step process for engineering
transportation assets to be more resilient to climate
impacts. Developed under Phase II of the Gulf Coast
Study, the process includes consideration of multiple
alternatives and cost benefit analysis. FHWA is now adding
to this work by developing specific recommendations and
approaches based on a cross-cutting analysis of a diverse
set of transportation assets nation-wide.

Using FHWA Emergency Relief (ER) funds, Colorado DOT rebuilt this
roadway damaged by 2013 flooding to be more resilient to future floods
by shifting the road a few feet further from the river, and using grouted
riprap and native vegetation to stabilize the riverbank. Betterments
involving added protective features are eligible for FHWA ER funds
if economically justified. In addition, repaired facilities may be built
to current design standards (which may be more resilient), without
being considered a betterment. Finally, states may use their regularly
apportioned Federal-aid funds for incremental costs.

FHWA will continue partnering with federal, state and local agencies on the shared goal of a transportation system
that provides safe mobility under current and future conditions, supporting the nation’s economy and quality of life.
LEARN MORE
FHWA’s climate change website offers publications, policies, guidance, webinar recordings, and tools for assessing vulnerabilities and
building resilience.
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/climate_change/adaptation/
Contact: Michael Culp, Sustainable Transport and Climate Change Team Leader, michael.culp@dot.gov, 202-366-9229

4

