Climate Resilience and Planning Peer Exchange:
Atlanta Regional Commission
Atlanta, Georgia
October 4-5, 2016

CONTENTS
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
Overview presentations .................................................................................................................. 4
Presentations on climate change impacts ...................................................................................... 6
Peer presentations .......................................................................................................................... 8
Atlanta-area presentations ........................................................................................................... 12
Key take-aways from Discussion ................................................................................................... 14
Appendix A: Agenda...................................................................................................................... 17
Appendix B: Peer exchange participants ...................................................................................... 18

This document is disseminated under the sponsorship of the Department of Transportation in the interest of
information exchange. The United States Government assumes no liability for its contents or use thereof.
The contents of this report reflect the views of the authors, who are responsible for the facts and accuracy of the
data presented herein. The contents do not necessarily reflect the official policy of the Department of
Transportation. This report does not constitute a standard, specification, or regulation.
The United States Government does not endorse products or manufactures. Trademarks or manufacturers' names
appear herein only because they are considered essential to the object of this document.

INTRODUCTION
This report summarizes a peer exchange on climate change resilience that was held October 45, 2016 in Atlanta, Georgia and hosted by the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC). The peer
exchange was co-organized by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and ARC.
The transportation sector plays an important role in addressing climate change both through
reducing greenhouse gas emissions (mitigation) and addressing the impacts of climate change
(adaptation). A concept closely related to adaptation is resilience, which FHWA defines as the
ability to anticipate, prepare for, and adapt to changing conditions and withstand, respond to,
and recover rapidly from disruptions.1 Climate adaptation and resilience are gaining
momentum in the transportation sector as transportation agencies realize their infrastructure is
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. In the last several years, FHWA has been supporting
state and regional transportation agencies in climate change adaptation activities, especially in
assessing vulnerability to climate change. Building off of these vulnerability assessments,
transportation agencies are beginning to identify adaptation strategies and integrate climate
change considerations into the transportation planning and project development processes.
The Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (FAST) Act, which was signed into law on
December 4, 2015, includes new requirements for state departments of transportation (DOTs)
and metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) to integrate resilience into the transportation
planning process. Following the authorization of the FAST Act, FHWA and the Federal Transit
Administration (FTA) updated their planning regulations2 with a requirement that the
metropolitan transportation plan assess capital investment and other strategies that reduce the
vulnerability of the existing transportation infrastructure to natural disasters (23 CFR
450.324(f)(7)). In addition, the planning rule states that MPOs should coordinate with officials
responsible for disaster risk reduction when developing a metropolitan transportation plan and
the Transportation Improvement Program (23 CFR 450.316(b)). The updated planning final rule
also added improving the resilience and reliability of the transportation system as a new
planning factor for states and MPOs to consider and implement in the transportation planning
process (23 CFR 450.206(a)(9) and 23 CFR 450.306(b)(9)).
The purpose of this peer exchange was for staff from MPOs and state DOTs to learn from peers
about best practices for integrating climate resilience into the planning process, including
assessing risks, developing adaptation options, and prioritizing projects for implementation. It
also provided an opportunity for stakeholders from the Atlanta area to connect with others in
the region working on climate resilience. Finally, FHWA will be producing resources and
information to help MPOs and state DOTs meet the FAST Act requirements related to
integrating resilience into the planning process. The peer exchange allowed FHWA to gather

1
2

See FHWA Order 5520 at http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/legsregs/directives/orders/5520.cfm.

The Final Rule for Statewide and Nonmetropolitan Transportation Planning and Metropolitan Transportation Planning can be
accessed at https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2016/05/27/2016-11964/statewide-and-nonmetropolitantransportation-planning-metropolitan-transportation-planning.

1

information on what resources and information would be helpful for state DOTs and MPOs in
developing strategies to address climate risks and meet the FAST Act requirements.
Peer exchange participants
The peer exchange involved presentations by representatives from MPOs and state DOTs from
around the country, presentations by Atlanta-based stakeholders working on resilience, and
facilitated discussion sessions. In addition, presenters from WSP Parsons Brinkerhoff and the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provided information on climate risks related to the
transportation system and public health, respectively. ARC and FHWA also presented about
their work on climate resilience to date. See Table 1 for a list of the organizations that gave
presentations during the peer exchange.
Table 1: Presenter organizations

Peer Agencies

Overview Presentations

Atlanta-based Organizations

Broward MPO

Atlanta Regional Commission

Hillsborough County MPO

Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention

City of Atlanta Office of
Sustainability

Massachusetts DOT
Maryland State Highway
Administration

Federal Highway Administration

Metropolitan North Georgia
Water Planning District

WSP Parsons Brinkerhoff

Southface

North Central Texas Council of
Governments
Puget Sound Regional Council
The following organizations participated in the peer exchange as observers and discussion
participants:














AECOM
Agnes Scott University
Cambridge Systematics
DeKalb County
Emory University
FHWA – Georgia Division
FTA – Region 4
Georgia Conservancy
Georgia Environmental Protection Division
Georgia Institute of Technology
Rockdale County
Southern Environmental Law Center
Volpe Center
2

This report provides brief summaries of the presentations, followed by an overview of the
major themes raised in the presentations and discussion sessions.

3

OVERVIEW PRESENTATIONS
The peer exchange organizers from ARC and FHWA began the meeting by describing their past
and current work on climate resilience.
ARC’s Planning Work on Climate Change – David D’Onofrio, ARC
ARC’s climate change work to date has primarily focused on climate change mitigation,
including conducting a greenhouse gas emissions inventory, using scenario planning to evaluate
the carbon emissions impacts of various land use and transportation strategies, and
incorporating carbon pricing into all proposed projects. ARC is also pursuing projects to reduce
vehicle miles traveled and evaluating how changes in community design can reduce emissions.
ARC is beginning to work on climate change adaptation as well. The agency used FHWA’s
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) climate data processing tool to identify ways in
which the Atlanta region’s climate will change in the future. ARC found that by 2100 Atlanta is
likely to experience more hot days, fewer days with temperatures below freezing, more
frequent heavy precipitation events, and longer periods between rain events. Moving forward,
ARC is planning to evaluate how these impacts will affect
the region’s transportation system, as well as develop
FHWA Order 5520 Definitions
strategies to prepare communities and infrastructure for
Preparedness means actions taken
these future weather conditions.
to plan, organize, equip, train, and
exercise to build, apply, and sustain
Climate Change Resilience: 20 Questions in 20 Minutes –
the capabilities necessary to
Heather Holsinger and Corbin Davis, FHWA
prevent, protect against, ameliorate
Staff from FHWA’s Sustainable Transport and Climate
the effects of, respond to, and
Change (STACC) team and Office of Planning discussed
recover from climate change related
FHWA’s work on climate resilience. Definitions from FHWA
damages to life, health, property,
Order 5520, Transportation System Preparedness and
livelihoods, ecosystems, and national
Resilience to Climate Change and Extreme Weather Events,
security.
can provide participants with a common vocabulary (see
sidebar). The presenters emphasized that the concept of
Adaptation is adjustment in natural
resilience incorporates both preparedness and adaptation
or human systems in anticipation of
as defined in Order 5520, and also involves both asset level
or response to a changing
and transportation system level interventions.
environment in a way that
effectively uses beneficial
FHWA has developed, and is currently revising, a Climate
opportunities or reduces negative
Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment
effects.
Framework that provides guidance on how to assess the
vulnerability of transportation assets to climate change and
Resilience or resiliency is the ability
extreme weather events. Between 2011 and 2015, FHWA
to anticipate, prepare for, and adapt
partnered with 24 state DOTs and MPOs to conduct
to changing conditions and
vulnerability assessments based on this framework. FHWA
withstand, respond to, and recover
has also produced engineering guidance related to
rapidly from disruptions.
4

assessing the effects of climate change and extreme weather events on highways in both
coastal and riverine environments (Hydraulic Engineering Circular 25 and Hydraulic Engineering
Circular 17). Moving forward, FHWA will continue to support state and local transportation
agencies in adapting to climate change, including producing resources and information to help
MPOs and state DOTs meet the FAST Act requirements related to integrating resilience into the
planning process.

5

PRESENTATIONS ON CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS
Two presentations provided participants with information on expected climate conditions and
impacts. Dr. Mike Meyer from WSP Parsons Brinkerhoff presented an overview of expected
climate changes and the effects climate change is likely to have on the transportation sector.
Paul Schramm of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) focused his presentation
on the effects that climate change will have on human health.
Climate Change Overview – Mike Meyer, WSP Parsons Brinkerhoff
Dr. Meyer described expected climate change impacts globally and in the Atlanta region.
Globally, temperatures are predicted to rise, extreme weather events are likely to become
more frequent and severe, and some regions of the world will experience more precipitation
while others will experience more drought. In Georgia, parts of the state are likely to
experience as many as 75 additional days above 95° F by 2070, and average temperatures may
increase by 5-6° F. In terms of precipitation, Georgia is likely to experience both an increase in
the number of high rainfall events and an increase in the length of time between rain events; in
other words, it is vulnerable to both flooding and drought.
For the transportation sector, these climate impacts can cause flooded roads, structural
damage to bridges and roadways, and worsened traffic conditions. In terms of flooding, much
of the work on transportation and climate change to date has focused on the impacts of sea
level rise and coastal storms. However, inland flooding can also cause major damage to
transportation systems, as evidenced by the Tennessee Superflood in 2010 and the I-680 flood
in Iowa in 2011. Heat can also negatively affect transportation infrastructure in many ways,
including:
 Instability of materials exposed to high temperatures can lead to pavement heave or
track buckling;


Exposure of encased equipment to high heat can lead to failure of equipment such as
traffic control devices and signal control systems;



Increased electricity usage and power outages during heat waves can affect the power
supply to rail operations;



Extended periods of high temperatures will affect safety conditions for employees that
work long hours outdoors, such as those working on infrastructure reconstruction and
maintenance activities;



Extreme temperatures will create dangerous conditions for many users of the
transportation system, placing greater emphasis on the use of air conditioning for
transit vehicles and stations; and



High temperatures will also negatively affect bicycle use and the desire and propensity
of individuals to walk outdoors.

6

Dr. Meyer concluded his presentation by discussing various ways in which climate resilience can
be considered in transportation planning, from setting goals and performance measures related
to resilience, to conducting site-specific studies, to using climate change in scenario planning or
as a criteria in project prioritization.
Climate Change and Human Health – Paul Schramm, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention
Mr. Schramm of the CDC, which is based in Atlanta, discussed how climate change threatens
human health and wellbeing by amplifying some existing health threats as well as creating new
ones. Increased heat can lead to heat-related illnesses as well as worsening air pollution, which
itself contributes to poor health. In addition, changes in pollen production due to heat can
worsen the impacts of asthma. Fresh water supplies are affected by climate change, both
through salt water intrusion into fresh water sources in areas experiencing sea level rise and
through droughts leading to water shortages. Climate change also affects the spread of disease.
For example, heavy precipitation can increase the risks of water borne illnesses and changes in
temperatures can shift the range of mosquito-borne illnesses.
Studies have shown that reframing discussions of climate change to focus on health can be a
powerful motivator in getting people to recognize the risks and take action. The CDC’s Climate
Change and Health Program helps health departments at the state and local level prepare for
the effects of climate change by providing scientific guidance, developing decision support
tools, ensuring public concerns are considered in climate change adaptation and mitigation
strategies, and developing partnerships between public health and other sectors. This program
has provided funding to 16 states and two cities through the Climate Ready States and Cities
Initiative. Funded states and cities use the CDC’s Building Resilience Against Climate Effects
(BRACE) framework to identify likely climate impacts in their communities, potential health
effects associated with these impacts, and their most at-risk populations and locations.

7

PEER PRESENTATIONS
The peer exchange provided an opportunity for MPOs and state DOTs from around the country
to share their experience with climate resilience planning. The organizations that presented
varied in the actions they have taken to date, from just beginning to consider the effects of
climate change and how to plan for them, to conducting detailed vulnerability assessments, to
developing projects that address climate change impacts. All of the MPOs and state DOTs that
presented, with the exception of the Puget Sound Regional Council, received funding from
FHWA from 2013-2015 as part of the Climate Resilience Pilot Program.
Accommodating Extreme Weather Adaptation to Planning and Sustainability in North Central
Texas – Jory Dille, North Central Texas Council of Governments
North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) covers a 12-county area with a
population of seven million in the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area. The region’s population
is expected to grow nearly 50 percent through 2040. NCTCOG is developing strategies to
address increased vehicle-miles traveled and congestion costs, plan necessary repairs on
existing infrastructure, and improve efficiency and resiliency.
NCTCOG conducted a climate change vulnerability assessment and found that climate change is
both a current and future problem. The main climate risks faced in the region are extreme heat,
heavy precipitation events and significant flooding, and lower annual rainfall and increased risk
of drought. The assessment found that roadways will be affected by both heat and flooding,
and identified significant arterial road segments that are vulnerable to these climate impacts.
To address these climate risks along with aging infrastructure and population growth, NCTCOG
has focused on transportation asset management. The agency’s long-range transportation plan,
Mobility 2040, identifies $118.9 billion for system improvements and focuses on strategies that
maximize the existing system. This represents a 27 percent increase from the last long-range
plan in funding for existing system maximization strategies. To prioritize projects, NCTCOG
scores potential projects based on performance measures, including system reliability and
environmental sustainability.
Surface Transportation Resiliency Planning in Hillsborough County, FL – Allison Yeh,
Hillsborough County Metropolitan Planning Organization
Hillsborough County, Florida has a population of 1.3 million and covers the Tampa metropolitan
area. The county is highly vulnerable to sea level rise and coastal flooding, with 158 miles of
coastline and a significant portion of the population living in areas prone to flooding. Although
the region has experienced flooding recently, it has not faced a direct hit by a hurricane in over
90 years, creating a false sense of security for residents.
Hillsborough County MPO used FHWA’s framework to conduct its vulnerability assessment.
The agency collected data on three climate variables: sea level rise, storm surge, and flooding. It
then used mapping and the regional transportation demand model to identify climate risks to
transportation assets, and sought feedback on the results from local transportation
8

stakeholders. Hillsborough County MPO also conducted an economic analysis, identifying
transportation delays and economic losses resulting from climate impacts. The MPO then
selected several assets on which to conduct a more detailed analysis to illustrate climate risks,
costs, and potential adaptation options.
Hillsborough County MPO has integrated climate considerations into its 2040 long-range
transportation plan by evaluating how investing in resilience could address the performance
measures of reduced vulnerability and crashes. The MPO found that by raising roads and
preventing shorelines from wave damage, it could reduce the time that roads would be
unusable after a Category 3 storm from eight weeks to three weeks and cut economic losses in
half over the course of the plan. Moving forward, Hillsborough County MPO will continue to
integrate climate change considerations into its next long-range transportation plan update and
coordinate with local jurisdictions on mainstreaming adaptation options for projects.
Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessments and Adaptation Options of
the Central Artery – Steven Miller, Massachusetts Department of Transportation
The Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) conducted an evaluation of
climate risks to the Central Artery/Tunnel system, a critical transportation asset in the Boston
region. The Central Artery/Tunnel is vulnerable to flooding from extreme coastal storms under
present and future conditions. MassDOT felt that the existing projections for flooding, which
were based on a bathtub model, did not give it the high quality hydrodynamic data it needed to
understand the effects of winds and waves from hurricanes and Nor’easters and the effects of
dams on the Charles and Mystic Rivers. As a result, MassDOT, along with regional partners,
conducted high resolution hydrodynamic modeling and created a new dataset showing the
effects of future sea level rise and storm surge flooding in Boston.
This data allowed MassDOT to better understand the vulnerabilities of the Central
Artery/Tunnel and develop adaptation strategies to address them. Although the modeling was
a costly project, MassDOT justified the cost because it had a low tolerance for risk to the
Central Artery/Tunnel, given that it is a new piece of infrastructure and a critical transportation
asset for the region. The new data from the Boston Harbor Flood Risk Model has been used by
local stakeholders conducting their own climate risk assessments, including the City of Boston
and surrounding municipalities, universities, and other state agencies. MassDOT is currently
expanding the model to the state’s entire coast and islands.
Maryland Adaptation and Vulnerability Assessment – Elizabeth Habic, Maryland Department
of Transportation/State Highway Administration
The State of Maryland is vulnerable to several impacts of climate change, including sea level
rise, increases in temperature, and increases in precipitation intensity and frequency. The
Maryland Department of Transportation/State Highway Administration (DOT/SHA) conducted a
FHWA climate change vulnerability assessment pilot study to assess the vulnerability of its
assets to climate change, develop methods to address current and future risk to the roadway
network, and provide process and policy recommendations. Maryland DOT/SHA chose to focus
9

its vulnerability assessment on three climate stressors related to flooding: sea level change,
storm surge, and precipitation. The vulnerability assessment focused on risks to bridges and
roadways in two coastal counties, Anne Arundel and Somerset.
To narrow down the number of assets it evaluated in detail, the Maryland DOT/SHA conducted
an initial screen to identify bridge assets located in areas vulnerable to climate change impacts.
It identified these areas based on the outer limits of the 2100 mean higher high water mark3,
the Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) model for a Category 3 Hurricane,
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain boundary plus a
50 foot buffer. Maryland DOT/SHA used FHWA’s Vulnerability Assessment Scoring Tool (VAST)
to evaluate vulnerability of the assets selected in the initial screen and develop a vulnerability
score. For its evaluation of roadways, Maryland DOT/SHA developed a Hazard Vulnerability
Index (HVI) that scores risk to a roadway asset based on whether it is an evacuation route, the
flood depth under future sea level and storm events, and the functional class of the roadway.
By combining both the highway locations identified by HVI and the bridges that scored highest
in VAST, the agency was able to identify “Vulnerable Areas at Risk.” Finally, Maryland DOT/SHA
conducted an origin/destination analysis to evaluate travel times and access to random
locations both before and after a hypothetical future flood event. The analysis identified
destinations that would take longer to reach or would not be reachable in 2100 due to sea level
rise and flooding.
Maryland DOT/SHA plans to use the results of its vulnerability assessment in several ways. It
plans to flag vulnerable areas as part of its Highway Needs Inventory, a planning document that
lists major capital construction projects. It will also provide the results to the counties and
municipalities addressed in the study to help them in their planning processes. The agency is
also undergoing a reorganization, and sustainability and climate change will become the focus
of a unit within the Innovative Planning and Performance Division.
Planning for Climate Resiliency – Kelly McGourty, Puget Sound Regional Council
The Puget Sound Regional Council (PSRC) covers four counties in the Seattle metropolitan area,
with a population of approximately four million. Previous planning efforts related to climate
change largely focused on mitigation, although PSRC is now prioritizing adaptation as well. The
last long-range transportation plan, Transportation 2040, which was published in 2010 and
updated in 2014, included a white paper on adaptation to climate change for transportation
planning in the Puget Sound region. The white paper had information on identifying potential
impacts, conducting sea level rise mapping, reviewing economic impacts, and identifying
potential future adaptation strategies.
In 2015, PSRC formed a regional collaborative on climate preparedness consisting of
municipalities, government agencies and other regional organizations. The collaborative is
currently working on expanding its membership, developing a work program, and hosting a
3

The mean higher high water (MHHW) mark is the average of the higher of the two high tides per day over a 19
year period called the National Tidal Datum Epoch.

10

webinar series. Seattle was recently selected as a pilot community under the National
Academies Resilient America Roundtable program, which convenes experts from the academic,
public, and private sectors to design or catalyze activities that build or enhance communities'
resilience. As part of this program, Seattle will develop resilience strategies focused on equity
and transportation. Seattle will coordinate these efforts with the regional collaborative. PSRC’s
Transportation 2040 Update will occur in 2018, and PSRC is working to expand its previous
climate change white paper with information on expected impacts, current adaptation efforts
around the region, and economic resiliency. PSRC staff are also working to communicate the
importance of climate resiliency to its board and other decision-makers, which can be
challenging given that this is a relatively new topic and faces many competing priorities.
Climate Resilience: A Southeast Florida Perspective – James Cromar, Broward Metropolitan
Planning Organization
Four counties in Southeast Florida (Palm Beach, Broward, Miami-Dade and Monroe) collaborate
on climate adaptation planning through the Southeast Florida Regional Climate Change
Compact. These counties have coordinated on a FHWA climate change resilience pilot project,
long range planning related to sea level rise, and emergency actions. Southeast Florida faces
many climate impacts, including sea level rise, storm surge, increasing temperatures, inland
flooding, and a rising water table. The FHWA pilot project was developed to build upon existing
vulnerability assessments, minimize the impacts of extreme weather events and sea level rise
on the regional transportation network, develop tools that integrate climate change adaptation
goals into the transportation decision making process, and prepare a climate change adaptation
model for other public transportation agencies.
As part of the pilot project, the Compact conducted a vulnerability assessment for the regional
road network and the Tri Rail network. Vulnerability scores were calculated based on
sensitivity, exposure, and adaptive capacity, and the assets most vulnerable to flooding were
identified for each county. The Compact is now working to integrate climate and vulnerability
data into decision-making through transportation planning and prioritization, the rehabilitation
of existing facilities in high risk areas, and changes to operations and maintenance.
Communities within the region are also beginning to develop adaptation strategies that address
some of the risks and vulnerable assets identified in the pilot.

11

ATLANTA-AREA PRESENTATIONS
Several presentations provided participants with information on climate resilience work that is
happening in Atlanta outside of the transportation sector. Presenters covered the topics of
municipal resilience strategies, green infrastructure, and the impacts of climate change on
water utilities.
City of Atlanta Climate Action Plan and Resilience Plan – Stephanie Stuckey Benfield and Jairo
Garcia, Mayor’s Office of Sustainability, City of Atlanta
Atlanta was the first city in Georgia to develop a Climate Action Plan, which it did in 2015. The
city’s Climate Action Plan has a goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 80 percent of
2009 levels by 2040, and the city is working to meet this goal through initiatives like improving
energy efficiency in buildings and promoting renewable energy and electric vehicles. Now,
Atlanta is working to improve climate resilience as well. In May 2016 Atlanta was selected as
one of the Rockefeller Foundation’s 100 Resilient Cities, and through this program will receive
funding to hire a Chief Resilience Officer, expertise to develop a resilience strategy, and access
to partners, technologies, and services.
Atlanta is considering resilience to both climate change and other stressors. The city held a
workshop in 2015 with experts from various sectors and identified the following major
vulnerabilities that threaten the city’s resilience: infrastructure failure and aging infrastructure,
inequality, terrorism and cyber-attacks, transportation, rainfall flooding, droughts and water
shortage, and food security. Moving forward, the city will hold additional workshops to gather
input from the public on these vulnerabilities and will develop a resilience strategy to address
them.
Green Infrastructure and Resilience – Robert Reed, Southface
The Southface Green Infrastructure and Resilience Institute (GIRI) works to provide training and
certification to regional professionals to install and maintain green infrastructure. In addition to
its role in workforce development, GIRI also aims to educate the public on the benefits of green
infrastructure. Green infrastructure can address climate risks by reducing negative impacts of
extreme weather events and sewer overflows. It can also have economic and social benefits
through creating green spaces, parks, and other amenities in disinvested and impoverished
areas. Green infrastructure provides an example of tactical, small-scale resilience, in contrast to
the major infrastructure projects that are typically considered when addressing vulnerability to
climate impacts.
Metro Water District Climate Utility Resiliency Study – Danny Johnson, Metropolitan North
Georgia Water Planning District, Atlanta Regional Commission
Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (Metro Water District) is staffed by ARC
and includes 15 counties and 93 cities in the region. The Metro Water District conducts
planning related to water supply and conservation, stormwater, wastewater, and watershed
management. The Metro Water District recently conducted a Utility Climate Resilience Study
12

with the goal of assessing the potential vulnerability of water resources and related
infrastructure given potential climate conditions in the future. The purpose of the study was
not to predict future climate conditions or the likelihood that certain conditions will occur, but
rather to identify climate conditions that would pose risks if they did occur.
The Metro Water District developed five representative scenarios of possible future climate
conditions based on global climate models: hot/wet, hot/dry, warm/wet, warm/dry, and a
middle scenario between the other four. It then identified the water demand, water supply,
and water quality impacts of these climate scenarios. Metro Water District also evaluated
infrastructure vulnerability, including the vulnerability of wastewater treatment plants to the
various climate scenarios. The overall findings from this study were that the most severe
climate impacts would occur in a hot/dry scenario, while the highest risk to infrastructure
would occur in a hot/wet scenario. Recommendations from the study include for the Metro
Water District to establish climate tracking protocols and identify trigger levels for adaptive
measures, as well as to implement preemptive adaptation measures such as green
infrastructure and drought management plans.

13

KEY TAKE-AWAYS FROM DISCUSSION
The peer exchange included three dedicated discussion sessions, as well as time for questions
and discussion after most presentations. The major topics and themes raised in the discussion
are presented below.
Climate impacts
Although much of the work on transportation and climate change impacts to date has focused
on sea level rise and coastal storms, participants discussed other climate impacts that their
communities are facing and for which they are preparing. One impact that some areas,
including Atlanta, are facing is the dual problem of more severe precipitation events that cause
flooding and longer periods between precipitation events, leading to drought. Heat is also a
major concern for the transportation sector, both through its direct impact on infrastructure
(pavement, rail, etc.) but also through its impact on the electricity supply and on the people
using the transportation system. The social impacts of climate change also affect the
transportation sector. For example, some non-coastal areas are considering whether they will
see an increase in migration from coastal areas as a result of sea level rise, and the impacts on
the transportation system that this migration could cause.
Data collection
In order to conduct a vulnerability assessment, there is a need for data on climate impacts.
Agencies face tradeoffs in deciding what climate data or modeling to use. Tools are available for
downscaling global climate data to a given region. However, this data may not consider all
climate risks or recognize all local geographic features that may affect climate impacts. On the
other hand, it is costly for agencies to conduct their own climate model downscaling; this may
only be cost-effective for large jurisdictions or for those with a low risk tolerance, where
accurate and detailed climate data is essential for designing solutions. In addition, state
agencies may be more equipped than MPOs to conduct climate model downscaling, and then
can provide this data to jurisdictions within their state. For example, Maryland DOT/SHA and
Massachusetts DOT collected climate data and conducted modeling and/or vulnerability
assessments, and provided the results to other jurisdictions.
Building support for resilience
A major theme of the discussion was building support for resilience among decision-makers.
Participants found this especially challenging in places where the state government leadership
is not focused on or is opposed to addressing climate change. Participants suggested the
following strategies for building support for climate resilience:
 Conduct a cost-benefit analysis and make an economic argument for investing in
resilience.


Discuss the climate risks to public health or the health benefits that investing in
resilience can bring. Studies have shown that reframing climate risks with a health lens
can motivate people to take action.
14



Add a climate resilience component into transportation projects that are currently being
planned and designed. Although this will add somewhat to the cost of the project, the
incremental cost for resilience improvements will be lower than with a standalone
project.



Reframe climate resilience with a different name (e.g., hurricane planning).



Identify climate impacts that a community is already facing and frame investments in
resilience as a way to address these.



Use Federal policies as a justification for investing in resilience. For example, the Council
of Environmental Quality’s guidance encourages looking at climate change impacts in
the National Environmental Policy Act process, and the FAST Act requires consideration
of resilience and natural disasters in state and metropolitan transportation planning.

Participants also noted that even in states that are not focused on climate resilience, MPOs still
have flexibility to assess climate risks and incorporate the results into the transportation
planning and project prioritization processes.
Funding
Participants discussed the need for funding to mainstream resilience into transportation
decision-making, and potential sources for this funding. One challenge is that while
interventions that build resilience typically save organizations money in the long term, such
activities cost money in the short term, and transportation agencies need to find the funding to
support the additional expenditures. Similarly, the benefits of many resilience interventions are
felt throughout a region, not just in the transportation sector; however, the costs for
transportation projects are borne solely by the transportation agency. Transportation agencies
need to figure out where to draw the line for quantifying the benefits when doing a costbenefit analysis.
Participants also discussed insurance and whether transportation infrastructure can be insured
so that the government is not fully fiscally responsible for replacing a piece of infrastructure
when it is damaged by severe weather. For example, MassDOT insured the Central
Artery/Tunnel. Participants raised the concern that insuring transportation assets could cause a
tendency to remain in vulnerable areas and rebuild rather than moving assets or improving
their resilience to climate impacts.
Regional and cross-sectoral collaboration
Participants noted the value of working with other agencies and jurisdictions on assessing
climate impacts and planning for resilience. Transportation agencies can partner with water
utilities, health departments, or other sectors to gather climate data and assess risks. Even
within one MPO, there is value in communicating climate-related work, as other departments
may also be working in this area and there may be opportunities for collaboration. For example,
within ARC both the transportation and water resource divisions are working on climate
resilience. There are also benefits to working on resilience through regional collaboration, such
15

as the Southeast Florida Regional Climate Compact, or the compact that is being developed in
the Puget Sound region.
Participants also discussed the need for expanding resilience beyond a focus on infrastructure.
Resilience should also address the people using the infrastructure and how climate change may
affect their behavior while using the transportation system. Some participants also raised the
need for resilience to consider equity and take an environmental justice perspective.
Resilience and the planning process
Although most of the state DOTs and MPOs that participated in the peer exchange had
assessed their transportation system’s vulnerability to climate change, progress on integrating
these results into the planning process and implementing resiliency plans is still in its early
stages. Participants discussed ways to incorporate climate resilience into the planning process.
One challenge is that resilience competes with other major priorities. In addition, in areas that
are currently experiencing the effects of climate change, some amount of climate funding
needs to be dedicated to getting the system up and running in an emergency, rather than to
planning for projects that build resilience.
Agencies may be able to integrate resilience into actions that they are doing anyway at a lower
incremental cost. For example, for assets that have a long service life, such as a bridge or a
tunnel, agencies should consider building climate resilience into the design of the asset from
the beginning. In contrast, there are certain actions that are done frequently enough (e.g.,
pavement design) for which climate-proofing in the short-term can be postponed.
State and MPO needs
FHWA will be developing resources and information to help state DOTs and MPOs meet the
resilience requirements in the FAST Act. Participants suggested several resources that would
help them integrate resilience into the transportation planning process:


Suggestions of performance measures related to resilience that could help agencies
consider climate change in the project prioritization process.



Resources for conducting an economic analysis or cost-benefit analysis of resilience
strategies.



A “menu” of adaptation and resiliency strategies.



Assistance for agencies that do not have any experience with climate resilience,
including suggestions for climate data sources.

16

APPENDIX A: AGENDA
ARC/FHWA Climate Resilience Peer Exchange
Oct 4-5, 2016
Atlanta Regional Commission Office, C Level, Harry West Room
Day 1 – Tuesday, October 4th Agenda
1:00 PM – Meeting Kick-off – Doug Hooker, ARC & Steve Luxenberg, FHWA (20 mins)
1:20 PM – Participant Introductions (25 mins)
1:45 PM – Climate Change Overview – Mike Meyer, WSB PB (30 mins)
2:15 PM – ARC’s Planning Work to Date on Climate Change – David D’Onofrio, ARC (20 mins)
2:35 PM – FHWA Overview on Climate Resilience Planning – Heather Holsinger and Corbin
Davis, FHWA
2:55 PM – BREAK (20 mins)
3:15 PM – Panel #1 Resiliency Planning Best Practices (1 hour)
North Central Texas Council of Governments – Jory Dille
Hillsborough County Metropolitan Planning Organization – Allison Yeh
4:15 PM – Group Discussion #1 (45 mins)
5:00 PM – Break for the day
Day 2 – Wednesday, October 5th Agenda
8:30 AM – Climate Change and Human Health – Paul Schramm, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (40 mins)
9:10 AM – Panel #2 Resiliency Planning Best Practices (1 hour)
Massachusetts Department of Transportation – Steven Miller
Maryland Department of Transportation/State Highway Administration – Elizabeth
Habic
10:10 AM – BREAK (20 mins)
10:30 AM – Atlanta’s Climate Resilience Strategies – Stephanie Stuckey-Benfield, Atlanta (30
mins)
11:00 AM – Group Discussion #2 (45 mins)
11:45 AM – Lunch (1hr15min)
1:00 PM – Southface Green Infrastructure & Resilience Institute – Robert Reed, Southface (25
mins)
1:25 PM – Utility Climate Resilience Study – Danny Johnson, ARC (25 mins)
1:50 PM – BREAK (20 mins)
2:10 PM – MPO/DOT Panel #3 Resiliency Planning Best Practices (1 hours)
Puget Sound Regional Council – Kelly McGourty
Broward Metropolitan Planning Organization – James Cromar
3:10 PM – Group Discussion #3 (45 mins)
3:55 PM – Closing Remarks & Wrap-Up (10 mins)
17

APPENDIX B: PEER EXCHANGE PARTICIPANTS
First Name
Adjo
Stephanie
Shan
Helen
Tamara
Kirsten
James
Corbin
Tiffani
Jory
David
Jerimiah
Jairo
Gil
Elizabeth
Heather
Doug
Crystal
Christy
Danny
Kyung-Hwa
Steve
Kelly
Keith
Michael
Steven
John
Amy
Shayna
Jim
Larry
Robert
Daniel
Elizabeth
Stephanie
Paul
Sylvia
Claire
Kofi
Allison
Ermis

Last Name
Amekudzi-Kennedy
Amoaning-Yankson
Arora
Barnes
Christion
Cook
Cromar
Davis
Davis
Dille
D'Onofrio
Easley
Garcia
Grodzinsky
Habic
Holsinger
Hooker
Jackson
Jeon
Johnson
Kim
Luxenberg
McGourty
Melton
Meyer
Miller
Orr
Plovnick
Pollock
Pomfret
Redd
Reed
Rochberg
Rowe
S. Benfield
Schramm
Smith
Still
Wakhisi
Yeh
Zayas

Organization
Georgia Tech
Georgia Tech
Southface
Southern Environmental Law Center
FHWA - GA Division
Rockdale County
Broward MPO
FHWA
FHWA - GA Division
NCTCOG
ARC
FTA
City of Atlanta
GA Environmental Protection Division
Maryland DOT/SHA
FHWA
ARC
ARC
WSB Parsons-Brinckerhoff
ARC
ARC
FHWA - GA Division
PSRC
FTA
WSB Parsons-Brinckerhoff
MA DOT
ARC
Volpe
ARC
GDOT
Cambridge Systematics
Southface
Emory
Agnes Scott
City of Atlanta
CDC
DeKalb County
AECOM
ARC
Hillsborough MPO
Georgia Conservancy

18

