THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION’S

CLIMATE CHANGE &
EXTREME WEATHER
VULNERABILITY
ASSESSMENT
FRAMEWORK
DECEMBER 2012

Acknowledgements

This document was developed by Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) staff, but it draws heavily
from a body of work produced for the FHWA by ICF International. It also draws from experiences and
work of the North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority (NJTPA), the Metropolitan Transportation
Commission (MTC), the Bay Area Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC), the California
Department of Transportation District 4, the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT),
the Oahu Metropolitan Planning Organization (OahuMPO), the University of Virginia Center for
Transportation Studies, and the many other agencies involved in the FHWA’s 2010-2011 Climate Change
Vulnerability and Risk Assessment Pilot Program.

Notice

This document is disseminated under the sponsorship of the U.S. Department of Transportation in the
interest of information exchange. The U.S. Government assumes no liability for use of the information
contained in this document. This report does not constitute a standard, specification, or regulation.
The United States Government does not endorse products or manufacturers. Trademarks or
manufacturers’ names appear herein only because they are considered essential to the objective of this
document.

Quality Assurance Statement

The Federal Highway Administration provides high-quality information to serve Government, industry,
and the public in a manner that promotes public understanding. Standards and policies are used to
ensure and maximize the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of its information. FHWA periodically
reviews quality issues and adjusts its programs and processes to ensure continuous quality
improvement.

Page ii

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

Table of Contents

Subject

Page

Executive Summary

v

1 Introduction

1

2

3

Figure 1: Vulnerability Assessment Framework

3

Defining Objectives and Scope

2.1 Articulating Objectives
2.1.1 Examples from Practice
2.2 Selecting and Characterizing Relevant Assets
2.2.1 Asset Type
2.2.2 Temporal Scope
2.2.3 Asset Data Availability
2.2.4 Further Delineating Assets
2.2.5 Examples from Practice: Selecting and Characterizing Relevant Assets
2.2.6 Resources for Selecting and Characterizing Relevant Assets
2.3 Assessing Asset Criticality
2.3.1 Examples from Practice: Assessing Criticality
Figure 2: WSDOT Criticality Rating Scale
2.3.2 Criticality Assessment Resources
2.4 Identify Key Climate Variables to Study
2.4.1 Key Climate Variables to Consider
2.4.2 Selecting Climate Variables to Study
2.4.3 Options for Obtaining Climate Information
2.4.4 Examples from Practice: Identifying Climate Variables for Study
Table 1: Climate Variables Used in the Gulf Coast Phase 2 Study
2.4.5 Resources for Identifying Key Climate Variables

Assessing Vulnerability

3.1 Developing Information on Asset Sensitivity to Climate
3.2 Collecting Data on Assets
3.2.1 Examples from Practice: Experiences with Data Collection and Integration
Table 2: New Jersey Pilot Data Collection Matrix (for major assets)
3.3 Developing Climate Inputs for the Vulnerability Assessment
3.3.1 Temperature and Precipitation
3.3.1.1 Examples from Practice: Temperature and Precipitation Projections
3.3.2 Sea level Rise and Storm Surge
3.3.2.1 Examples from Practice: Sea-Level Rise and Storm Surge Approaches
and Other Considerations
3.3.3 Resources for Developing Climate Inputs for the Vulnerability Assessment
3.4 Identifying and Rating Vulnerabilities
3.4.1 Examples from Practice: Identifying and Rating Vulnerabilities
Figure 3: Roadways Inundated by 1 meter of sea level rise, coastal study area
Table 3: Roadway miles inundated by 1 meter of sea level rise, coastal study area
Table 4: The WSDOT Workshop Impact Rating Scale.
3.5 Considering Adaptive Capacity

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

4
5

9

11

16

17
18
21

28

32

Page iii

Table of Contents

Subject

3.6 Incorporating Likelihood and Risk
3.6.1 Assessing Risk
Figure 4: Risk Rating Matrix
3.6.2 Examples from Practice: Assessing Risk
Table 5: Sea Level Rise Risk Assessment for Honolulu International Airport
3.6.3 Resource for Assessing Risk

4 Integrating Vulnerability into Decision Making

4.1 Identifying, Analyzing, and Prioritizing Adaptation Options
4.2 Incorporating Vulnerability Assessment Results into Transportation Programs
& Processes
4.2.1 Examples from Practice: Incorporating Results into Transportation Programs and
Processes
4.2.2 Resources for Incorporating Results into Transportation Programs and Processes
4.3 Stakeholder Engagement and Communication
4.3.1 Strategies for Effective Communication

32

36

36
36

39

5 Next Steps

41

APPENDIX A: Vulnerability Assessment Summaries

42

APPENDIX B: Climate Effects and Impacts

44

Glossary

48

Table B1:
Table B2:
Table B3:
Table B4:

References

Page iv

Page

Impacts of temperature on highway operations and infrastructure
Impacts of precipitation on highway operations and infrastructure
Impacts of storm intensity on highway operations and infrastructure
Impacts of sea level rise on operations and highway infrastructure

49

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

FHWA’s Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability
Assessment Framework
Executive Summary
The Federal Highway Administration’s (FHWA’s) Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability
Assessment Framework is a guide for transportation agencies interested in assessing their vulnerability
to climate change and extreme weather events. It gives an overview of key steps in conducting
vulnerability assessments and uses in-practice examples to demonstrate a variety of ways to gather and
process information. The framework is comprised of three key steps: defining study objectives and
scope; assessing vulnerability; and incorporating results into decision making.
Defining the objectives and scope of the study at the beginning of the process is important because it
creates boundaries for the analysis and can limit extraneous data collection efforts. To define study
scope, agencies should first consider their overall goals and objectives. Objectives for a vulnerability
assessment may include siting new assets in areas less vulnerable to climate change, educating staff
regarding overall climate risks to the agency’s transportation system, or informing the development of
adaptation strategies. Based on these objectives, an agency can then select and characterize relevant
assets and identify climate variables for study. The initial objectives and scope may be altered by the
other steps in the process as new information is gathered or limitations are better understood.
Climate change and extreme weather vulnerability in the transportation context are a function of a
transportation asset or system’s sensitivity to climate effects, exposure to climate effects, and adaptive
capacity. Tasks in the vulnerability assessment include: gathering and integrating data and information
on asset location, characteristics, and climate sensitivities; gathering and obtaining information on
historical weather events and projected climate; combining the asset and climate information to identify
vulnerabilities; and potentially, assigning a level of risk of the climate impacts on the assets. The
vulnerability assessment work is an iterative process; information gathered on assets may inform
climate information needs and vice versa.
Incorporating the results of the vulnerability assessment into the agency’s decision-making process
ensures that the study results are used in practice. An agency may be able to use the results of the
assessment in its asset management programs, hazard mitigation plans, transportation planning project
selection criteria, or other programs and processes. In addition, a transportation agency might be
interested in using the results of the analysis to inform the development of specific adaptation
strategies for assets identified as highly vulnerable to climate change.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page v

Page vi

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

1 Introduction
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA’s) Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability
Assessment Framework (hereafter, “the framework”) is a guide and collection of resources for use in
analyzing the impacts of climate change and extreme weather on transportation infrastructure. Its
purpose is to identify key considerations, questions, and resources that can be used to design and
implement a climate change vulnerability assessment. The processes, lessons learned, and resources
outlined in the framework are geared toward State departments of transportation (DOTs), metropolitan
planning organizations (MPOs), and other agencies involved in planning, building, or maintaining the
transportation system. It includes suggestions and examples applicable to a wide range of applications,
from small qualitative studies to large, detailed, data-intensive analyses. The resources included in the
framework will be added to and updated over time.
The framework is informed by and draws examples from
five climate change vulnerability and risk assessment
pilot projects that the FHWA sponsored in 2010-2011
(hereafter, “the 2010 pilots”). The 2010 pilots were
undertaken by State DOTs and MPOs to implement an
earlier version of the framework, which the FHWA
termed the “Vulnerability and Risk Assessment
Conceptual Model.” The conceptual model was meant to
serve as a flexible guide for the 2010 pilots to test these
basic steps and for the FHWA to obtain feedback on the
suggested process. This updated framework uses the
experiences of the pilots to provide some examples of
the “how to” of the assessment. The 2010 pilots were:
•
•
•
•
•

Climate change vulnerability in the
transportation context is a function of a
transportation system’s exposure to climate
effects, sensitivity to climate effects, and
adaptive capacity.
Exposure refers to whether the asset or
system is located in an area experiencing
direct impacts of climate change, such as
temperature and precipitation changes, or
indirect impacts, such as sea level rise.
Sensitivity refers to how the asset or system
fares when exposed to an impact.

North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority/
Adaptive capacity refers to the systems’
New Jersey Partnership - Coastal and Central New
ability to adjust to cope with existing climate
Jersey (”the New Jersey Pilot”).
variability or future climate impacts.
Oahu Metropolitan Planning Organization - Island of
Oahu (“the Oahu MPO pilot”).
Metropolitan Transportation Commission/Bay Area Conservation and Development Commission/
California Department of Transportation District 4 - San Francisco Bay (“the San Francisco Pilot”).
Virginia DOT/University of Virginia - Hampton Roads (“the Virginia Pilot”).
Washington State DOT - State of Washington (“the WSDOT pilot”).

The framework also draws from the FHWA’s Gulf Coast Study, Adaptation Peer Exchanges, Federal
Transit Administration adaptation pilots, and other work. For more information on each of the pilots
and other efforts, see Appendix A, or the FHWA’s 2010 pilots website.
The vulnerability assessment framework consists of three primary components, as shown in Figure 1 and
described in more detail below:
1. Defining objectives and scope.
2. Assessing vulnerability.
3. Integrating vulnerability into decision-making.
Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 1

Figure 1: Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

Page 2

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

2 Defining Objectives and Scope
This section provides suggestions and resources for articulating objectives, selecting and characterizing
relevant assets, and identifying climate variables for study. Together, these steps frame the scope of the
vulnerability assessment and drive the details required for the analysis. They form bounds to the study,
minimizing data collection and analysis activities that would ultimately be extraneous to study
objectives.
While we recommend articulating the objectives of the assessment as a first step, agencies may find it
useful to simultaneously work to characterize relevant assets and identify climate variables to study.

Formulating Study Teams
Deciding who will be involved in the study has a large impact on how the study is run and the final
outcomes. The members of the study team will for the most part be dictated by the study objectives.
Often, a cross-disciplinary team is needed to integrate long-range planning, engineering, and asset
management considerations into the vulnerability assessment effectively. For instance, each of the
following disciplines may have something to offer for the study:
• Transportation planners are responsible for long-range planning of the transportation system,
and regularly work with scenario planning and other tools for planning long-term investments
and policies in the face of uncertain futures.
• GIS specialists can provide invaluable expertise in both analyzing and displaying transportation
assets and vulnerability information.
• Asset managers may have valuable datasets and are familiar with the conditions of assets.
• State climatologists can provide information and insight into historical climate data and trends,
and in some cases future projections.
• NOAA and University climate change research centers can provide projections targeted to your
study area.
• Maintenance personnel often have the best on-the-ground familiarity with the ways weather
events affect transportation assets today, and what it takes to maintain the system in the face
of these impacts.
• Design engineers (e.g., structural, hydraulic, coastal, or other relevant disciplines) can provide
input into the sensitivity of infrastructure to climate impacts and ideas/costs for adaptation
solutions.
• Natural resource agency personnel can provide insight into trends in the natural environment
and understanding of how projected changes might impact ecosystem services.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 3

2.1 Articulating Objectives
It is important to identify goals and objectives early in the vulnerability assessment process as they help
determine the level of detail required in the analysis and the data and products that might be needed.
When developing the objectives, consider the intended outcomes and target audiences. Objectives can
be based on a range of activities or goals. Some questions to consider:

What actions might be motivated by the assessment?
Who is your target audience?
What products are needed?
How will they be used?
What level of detail is required?
Example objectives include:
• Understanding the vulnerability of an agency’s overall transportation system to climate change
on a very general level.
• Informing the development and implementation of effective adaptation strategies.
• Integrating the vulnerability assessment into existing agency decision making processes.
• Planning for the siting or construction of new assets or services.
• Prioritizing among potential improvements or retrofits to existing assets.
• Implementing operational or design changes to mitigate climate vulnerabilities.
• Determining potential consequences from a particular type of climate impact, such as sea-level
rise.
• Identifying segments or facilities at risk to climate change impacts.
• Understanding the scale and cost of climate impacts.
• Developing or augmenting data collection efforts about assets.
• Establishing or improving geo-spatial tools that can be used for transportation planning.
• Engaging stakeholders within the community or across other agencies.
• Educating transportation staff about potential risks posed by climate variability and climate
change.
• Raising awareness among the public about activities to manage climate risks or efforts to bolster
sustainability.
2.1.1. Examples from Practice: Articulating Objectives
Objectives deeply influence the scope and methodology of assessments. For example:
•

Page 4

The San Francisco pilot team’s vulnerability assessment work was a part of the “Adapting to
Rising Tides” (ART) project (www.adaptingtorisingtides.org), which is designed to increase the
Bay Area’s preparedness and resilience to sea level rise and storm events while protecting
critical ecosystem and community services. The purpose of the project was to help the region’s
transportation and conservation planners improve vulnerability and risk assessment practices
and to help formulate effective adaptation strategies. A goal of the project was to develop an
approach for fostering local agency support and input on climate vulnerability and risk
assessments. As such, the study team limited the study area for this initial effort a portion of
one county, and limited the project scope to analyzing the impacts of sea-level rise and storm
events. Many of the analysis steps involved efforts to engage stakeholders, consistent with the
Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
overall emphasis of the ART project on a collaborative planning process. The team developed
detailed risk and vulnerability summaries for the most vulnerable ground transportation assets
in order to inform the development of future adaptation strategies.
•

The New Jersey pilot team’s work represented a first step in a climate assessment for the
various team members. Their project was designed to address a broad range of climate-related
concerns. Their work is intended to be a platform for further assessment for other areas of
New Jersey and their results will be used to engage a variety of transportation planners working
at local, State, and regional levels. It included the compilation of a relatively comprehensive
inventory of assets within two designated study regions, as well as the collection and analysis of
a range of climate variables for the impacts analysis. The pilot team also helped to strengthen
the partnerships among the agencies represented.

•

The Gulf Coast Phase 2 study, which is being conducted by U.S. Department of Transportation
(USDOT) in cooperation with the South Alabama Regional Planning Commission (SARPC),
focuses on assessing vulnerability of Mobile, AL and developing analysis methods that can be
replicated by other areas. The project also has a goal of enhancing regional decision makers'
ability to understand potential impacts on specific critical components of infrastructure and to
evaluate adaptation options. To this end, the study team has for the most part limited the
project scope to methods and datasets that would typically be available in other study areas
(with the exception of the climate information). The study team established a stakeholder
group of local decision makers with which they regularly coordinate and narrowed the scope of
assets for detailed study to those most important to the region.

•

The Virginia Pilot study was led by researchers from the University of Virginia. The study team
was interested in developing a decision support model that could be used by multiple areas,
using Hampton Roads as a case study. They worked with the Hampton Roads Planning District
Commission to test the model for real-world application. They have made their model available
on a Web site at: http://www.virginia.edu/crmes/fhwa_climate/.

2.2 Selecting and Characterizing Relevant Assets
Transportation agencies need to decide which assets they wish to evaluate to meet the objectives of
their assessment. Identifying the relevant assets for a vulnerability study and determining which
characteristics of these assets to examine can help agencies narrow the scope of the vulnerability study.
For example, if an agency would like to focus on a certain set of assets (e.g., owned or planned assets) it
would begin the process by deciding which assets to include, assessing data availability for those assets,
and understanding the timeframe and other important characteristics of managing those assets. When
compiling this inventory, agencies should also gather any information that may help later to evaluate
how resilient the asset is to climate stressors, and how costly damage to the asset or reductions in
service could be. Example information types are provided below.
2.2.1

Asset Type

A wide range of asset types and system services could be considered in the assessment, depending on
an agency’s objectives. Transportation infrastructure such as roads, rails, and bridges will be a major
focus for most agencies, but assets can also include support facilities, vehicles, and even ecosystem
related assets for agencies interested in understanding how climate change will affect their

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 5

environmental commitments or the ecosystem services on which the agency may rely. Some of the
assets and systems that might be considered include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
2.2.2

Bridges/tunnels
Culverts/Storm sewers
Road segments
Key evacuation routes
Rail lines, rail yards and intermodal transfer points, and passenger stations
Transit system facilities and vehicles
Bicycle and pedestrian facilities
Port and airport infrastructure and access routes
Maintenance and operations facilities
Signals and traffic control centers
Back-up power, communication, fueling, and other emergency operations systems
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS)
Signs and other roadside assets
Pipelines and energy corridors
Storm water management facilities
Wetlands
Floodplains
Roadside vegetation
Areas of potential rock fall
Temporal Scope

The study goals and audience may drive the temporal scope of the assets being assessed for
vulnerability. If the target audience includes maintenance staff, then the study might focus on seasonal
effects to existing assets. Alternatively, if the goal of the assessment is to help a metropolitan planning
organization consider climate change effects in their long-term planning efforts, then it may be useful to
include the future, planned assets that are in the long-range transportation plan in the universe of
assets reviewed for vulnerability. In general, if the audience for the study is concerned about assets
with long design lives (and planned upgrades) or assets envisioned for the future, it is important to
include these assets in the analysis. For instance, the goal of the study may be to provide input to
capital and rehabilitation cycles, so that new assets and upgraded assets incorporate needed
adaptations.
2.2.3

Asset Data availability

Data availability can be a limiting factor on the inclusion of assets in the study scope. A variety of data is
needed for climate vulnerability assessments, only some of which may be easily gleaned from standard
agency databases. In some cases, necessary data may be in multiple databases or in different formats
and may require significant effort to merge the information into a usable format. Typical data that might
be needed for a vulnerability assessment includes:
•
•
•
•
Page 6

Age of asset
Geographic location
Elevation
Current/historical performance and condition
Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
2.2.4

Level of use (traffic counts, forecasted demand)
Replacement cost
Repair/maintenance schedule and costs
Structural design
Materials used
Design lifetime and stage of life
LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) remote sensing data
Federal Emergency Management (FEMA) maps
Floodplain and tsunami inundation zone maps
Vegetation and soils surveys
Further Delineating Assets

In most cases, time and resource constraints prevent analyzing every asset in a transportation system.
An important part of scoping the study, therefore, is finding a way to delineate which assets to examine.
A number of different approaches have been used:
 Jurisdictional. Agencies may choose to limit the assessment to assets that are within their control
(e.g., State-owned facilities for a State DOT analysis). Though less comprehensive, this can more
directly inform future actions by the agency.
 Geographic. Specific areas may be more vulnerable to some climate effects. For instance, low
lying areas are more vulnerable to flooding from sea-level rise or river flooding. Agencies might
focus on these areas to quickly limit the analysis to the assets most likely to be affected by climate
changes.
 Representative. An agency interested in understanding the range of impacts that might affect its
system could select a small number of assets that represent the different types of infrastructure and
assets found in its system.
 Historically poor performing or old infrastructure. Assets that are subject to frequent flooding
and debris problems or old infrastructure with little design life left may be most vulnerable to the
additional stressors imposed by climate changes.
 Most critical. Another approach is to identify the most critical elements of the transportation
system for analysis, using quantitative or qualitative criteria. This provides a structured way to focus
on the assets that are most important for the functioning of the transportation system. For instance,
this approach might be taken if the objective of the vulnerability assessment is to understand the
potential impact of climate change on the evacuation routes within a region. However, sometimes
defining the most “critical” assets in a system can become politicized, as stakeholders may feel that
their interests are not given sufficient priority. [See Section 2.3 for more information on conducting
a criticality assessment.]
2.2.5

Examples from Practice: Selecting and Characterizing Relevant Assets

The pilot teams chose different ways of defining the scope of the assets to include. Many of these
choices were related to the objectives of the overall analysis. In addition, these choices often reflected
the jurisdictional boundaries of the agencies involved in the assessment or limits of the resources
available. For example:
Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 7

•

The WSDOT Pilot team focused on transportation infrastructure that it owned, which included roads,
rails, ferry terminals, and airports. They included assets already in place and funded projects (permitted
and in final design), as opposed to proposed projects in transportation plans.

•

The Virginia Pilot team performed analyses along four different dimensions of transportation planning,
focusing on: existing assets, projects within the existing Long Range Transportation Plan, transportation
analysis zones, and transportation policies.

•

The San Francisco pilot team began with a list of almost 150 assets. These were narrowed down by
combining assets (for example, including local streets with bike lanes and bus routes instead of looking
at all three networks separately), eliminating assets that would not experience sea level rise under any
of the anticipated scenarios, and ultimately focusing on representative and unique assets in the study
area. These assets were evaluated to determine their specific risk and vulnerability, as well as, the risk
and vulnerability of the system the asset was from. The team cited three reasons for deciding to use a
set of representative and unique assets rather than a set of identified critical assets:
o Most assets in the small study area were arguably important.
o Determining importance would require data and detail beyond the budget and schedule of the
project, and there was not enough background information on some of the facilities to perform an
assessment of criticality.
o They did not want to pass over assets that may not be “critical” but have intrinsic value to the
region (such as recreational, commute or goods movement value).

•

The New Jersey Pilot team conducted a detailed analysis using the statewide travel demand model to
identify the zones with the greatest travel activity, and used that as a basis for determining critical
corridors and assets throughout the study area.

•

The Oahu MPO Pilot team used stakeholder input in a multi-day workshop to identify the areas and
types of infrastructure that were considered high priority, and develop a list of five assets to focus on in
subsequent analysis. The Pilot team identified several advantages of the stakeholder workshop
method of identifying assets:
o It accomplished multiple objectives in a short timeframe.
o It helped accomplish the task with limited financial resources. Additionally, the pilot team was able
to count the attendance of many workshop participants as in-kind match for Federal funding
requirements.
o It served as a method for technology transfer within the State of Hawaii and to other Pacific island
nations.

•

The Gulf Coast Phase 2 Study boundaries were limited to the Mobile, AL metropolitan area, a
significantly smaller study area than phase one of the study. The smaller study area allowed for a more
detailed analysis. The study focused on critical assets for each of six modes: highways, transit, rail,
airports, ports, and land-based pipelines.

2.2.6

Resources for Selecting and Characterizing Relevant Assets

Assessing Criticality in Transportation Planning, FHWA 2011. This memo discusses approaches for
narrowing the universe of transportation assets to study in a climate change vulnerability and risk
assessment by assessing their "criticality" and otherwise narrowing study scope. It identifies common

Page 8

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
challenges, and draws on examples from the FHWA Adaptation Conceptual Model Pilots and the ongoing
USDOT Gulf Coast Phase 2 study.

2.3 Assessing Asset Criticality
Performing a criticality assessment is one way to narrow assets for further study. It provides a
structured way to identify the most important assets that an agency might wish to examine for
vulnerability to climate change. Although useful, criticality assessments can be resource and data
intensive. There are several approaches available for asset prioritization, falling into two broad
categories (these general approaches can also be used to prioritize assets for reasons other than
criticality):

Desk Review. One approach to formulating criticality criteria is to identify a broad range of
criteria that capture use and access across a range of modes and systems. Assets are ranked
based on data such as average daily traffic, functional classification, goods movement,
emergency management, and expert judgment. Advantages of the approach include its
transparency and replicability. However, lack of data on important elements of criticality, many
of which are qualitative and locally specific, or not available from the private sector, could
undermine results of the desk review in the eyes of the local stakeholders and decision makers.
Moreover, the results are dependent on the weight applied to the various criteria; again, this
weighting may not adequately capture local concerns.
Stakeholder Input. Determining asset criticality based on input from select stakeholders and

local experts is a second approach to assessing criticality. With a stakeholder input approach,
the project leaders will identify a group of stakeholders in the region with expert knowledge of
specific interests (e.g., commercial activity, public safety, or road maintenance). The project
leaders will then elicit feedback from these stakeholders on which assets are critical.
Advantages of the stakeholder approach include getting buy-in from relevant stakeholders early
in the process, encouraging collaboration and communication among stakeholders and actors
likely to implement any adaptation strategies, accessing information that is not readily available
in publicly-available datasets, and quickly assessing criticality without a lengthy research
process. However, the results of the stakeholder -driven process are highly subjective, and the
outcomes are dependent on the quality of the stakeholder engagement. For example, if project
leaders decide to hold a workshop or series of workshops to solicit stakeholder feedback, the
quality of the workshop facilitation, composition of workshop attendees, and level of
participation from key experts will be important factors in the ultimate success of the
stakeholder input approach.
Often, the two approaches are combined. Typically, a desk review will identify an initial list of critical
assets based on commonly available data such as average daily traffic or economic information for the
region (e.g., data on imports/exports from a particular port). The project team will then use the results
of the desk review to inform and structure feedback from stakeholders and local experts.
2.3.1
•

Examples from Practice: Assessing Criticality
The New Jersey pilot used the desk review approach. They developed a GIS based tool to
conduct a “destination-based” criticality assessment, considering jobs, population density,

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 9

average annual daily traffic, and ridership data. They note that their GIS criticality assessment
tool “provides agencies with a robust platform to support smart decision-making, but it is not
intended to substitute for the judgment and discretion of agency officials.”
•

The Oahu MPO pilot used the stakeholder input approach. They held a two-day multidisciplinary workshop to identify five critical assets for further study.

•

The WSDOT pilot also used the stakeholder input approach. In workshops around the State,
WSDOT employees with local knowledge rated facilities for criticality on a ten-point scale. Note
that while they developed criticality ratings, the WSDOT study assessed the climate vulnerability
of all assets, not just those identified as critical. [See Figure 2]
Very low to low

1

2

Moderate

3

4

5

Critical to Very Critical
6

7

8

9

10

Criticality of asset

Notice that along with the qualitative terms there is an associated scale of 1 to 10, this is
to serve as a facilitation tool for some people who may find it useful to think in terms of a
numerical scale – although the scoring by each individual is of course subjective. The scale
is a generic scale of criticality where “1” is very low (least critical) and “10” is very critical.

Typically
involves:
Typically involves:
non-NHS
• Non-NHS
• low
Low AADT
AADT
alternate
routesavailable
available
• Alternate routes

Typically
involves:
Typically involves:
some
NHS
• Some NHS
• non-NHS
Non-NHS
AADT
• low
Low to
to medium
medium AADT
asan
anAlternate
• serves
Serves as
alternative
forroutes
other
for other State
state routes

Typically
involves:
Typically involves:
Interstate
• Interstate
• Lifeline
Lifeline
NHS
• some
Some NHS
• sole
Sole access
Access
no
routes
• No alternate
Alternate routes

Figure 2: WSDOT Criticality Rating Scale
•

Page 10

The Gulf Coast 2 project used a combined desk review and stakeholder input. A matrix of
socioeconomic, operational, and health and safety characteristics of each potential asset was
developed to “score” each asset for criticality. The scoring was done through a combination of
quantitative measures and qualitative best judgment. A redundancy analysis was performed
using the regional travel demand model to test the effect that losing particular links in the
network had on congestion. The list of assets developed from this scoring system was
supplemented with input from the study stakeholder group. The involvement of the stakeholder
group was essential, since one of the lessons learned was that the “desk review” did not capture
all the assets regarded as critical by local stakeholders. For instance, stakeholder input led to the
inclusion of the Bayou La Batre port, home to a fishing and shrimping fleet with seafood
processing facilities deemed important to the Mobile economy.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

2.3.2

Criticality Assessment Resources

Assessing Criticality in Transportation Adaptation Planning, FHWA, 2011. This memo discusses
approaches for narrowing the universe of transportation assets to study in a climate change
vulnerability and risk assessment by assessing their "criticality" and otherwise narrowing study scope. It
identifies common challenges, and draws on examples from the FHWA Adaptation Conceptual Model
Pilots and the ongoing USDOT Gulf Coast Phase 2 study.
Assessing Infrastructure for Criticality in Mobile, AL: Final Technical Memo, FHWA, 2011. This memo
summarizes the methodology and findings of Task 1 of the Gulf Coast Phase 2 study, which identified
the transportation infrastructure components most critical to the Mobile region.

2.4 Identify Key Climate Variables to Study
An important first step to a vulnerability assessment is identifying which climate variables should be
included in the study. Not all changes to the future climate will be significant to the local or regional
transportation network, and limiting the study to the key variables of interest may allow for more indepth projections of these variables. Section 3.3 includes more detailed information on developing
climate information.
2.4.1

Key climate variables to consider

A range of future changes to the climate are of importance to transportation systems. Which ones are
important to a specific transportation agency will vary by region and by study objectives. For
transportation, the most important changes are often not changes to annual or seasonal averages, but
to relatively short duration extreme events that can cause significant damage to transportation
infrastructure or disrupt transportation operations. Examples of the kinds of climate changes included in
transportation vulnerability assessments are broadly outlined below:
 Temperature. Temperature is projected to increase in almost every part of the country in the
coming decades. For transportation, some impacts of interest might include increases in the number
of very hot days, heat waves, changes to freeze-thaw cycles, and changes to the length of the
construction season.
 Extreme Precipitation Events. Parts of the United States are projected to get wetter in the future
while others will get dryer. However, many of the most significant transportation impacts will likely
come from extreme precipitation events, which are projected to intensify. This poses flooding risks
to roads, rails, maintenance facilities, and other assets, with below grade infrastructure such as
tunnels, and poorly drained facilities being particularly vulnerable. Some areas will experience cycles
of extended drought followed by extreme precipitation events which may destabilize vegetation
along hillsides and increase the likelihood of rockfall.
 Sea-Level and Coastal Storm Surge. Sea-level is already rising along the U.S. coastlines, and the
rate of sea-level rise is projected to accelerate over the coming century. This presents the risk of
permanent or periodic inundation of coastal infrastructure as well as increased coastal erosion,
rising groundwater levels and changes in salinity and it poses additional risks during storms by

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 11

increasing storm surge heights as compared to today. In addition, coastal storms may intensify in
the future, further increasing storm surge levels.
 Permafrost Thaw. In Alaska, much transportation infrastructure is built on permafrost
foundations. Warming temperatures in the Arctic are already causing damage by thawing
permafrost.
 Snowmelt Hydrology. Changes in winter snow accumulation, the timing and rate of spring
snowmelt, and changes from a snow dominant to a rain dominant regime can cause an imbalance in
the sediment transport characteristics of rivers, leading to flooding and channel instability problems
for transportation infrastructure that is built alongside or crosses rivers.
2.4.2

Selecting climate variables to study

The climate variables selected will most likely be influenced by agencies’ experiences regarding the
system’s performance in the past in response to the local weather, especially during extreme weather
conditions such as high winds, heat waves, flooding caused by heavy precipitation or coastal storms, or
drought. Examining transportation system performance during historic weather events can aid in
understanding the sensitivity of the transportation system to weather extremes and aid in selection of
the climate variables and thresholds to examine in the projections, providing information that can be
used to gauge impacts associated with future climate conditions.
An assessment of past weather-related disruption and damage may consider:
•
•
•
•
•

Weather related sources of disruption to transportation services.
Transportation assets currently affected by weather extremes.
Damage to roads or bridges, or supporting infrastructure (e.g., culverts).
Thresholds at which the system begins to experience impacts (e.g., a specific high temperature
or a peak flow rate that has led to damage or failure).
Locations within the system that experience impacts.

The historical information can provide a foundation from which to identify future vulnerabilities and the
climate variables/thresholds that should be addressed in the projections. For example, if heat waves
pose problems for transportation systems or assets, then the model projections for temperature during
the spring, summer, and fall months should be investigated closely (increases in winter temperatures
are unlikely to result in “heat waves” for most locations). A specific variable to consider might be the
frequency of days over 95 degrees Fahrenheit in the future, which might affect restrictions on
construction or operations work crews, or perhaps information on likely exceedances of the
temperature threshold applied in a particular materials specification or guidance.
While these thresholds should inform the variables for which projections are run, it is also important to
be mindful of the potential of climate effects previously experienced rarely, if at all. For instance, in
coastal areas it may make sense to consider projections of sea-level rise even if sea levels or tides have
not been a concern in the past. [See section 3.4 for additional discussion of climate sensitivity.]

Page 12

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

2.4.3

Options for Obtaining Climate Information

One consideration in determining what climate variables to look at may be the availability of future
climate data for your study area, given the resources at your disposal. Information on projected
changes in climate can be obtained in several different ways, including:
•

Refer to existing climate information developed by others, like the Unites States Global Change
Research Program (USGCRP),that is relevant at broad geographical scales, as noted above.
Preliminary questions on potential impacts may be answered by referring to broader regional
reports on changes in climate.

•

Use climate data that has already been downscaled to your area for other studies. Some States
and metropolitan areas have developed downscaled climate data for State or city climate action
plans. These data can then be used for a more detailed transportation analysis.

•

Work with climate modelers to develop projections tailored to your needs. This can be a
resource intensive approach, but can be used to generate detailed information for your analysis.
(This approach is discussed further in the Analysis section below.)

•

Use information that is being used for other studies in your State or region in order to be
consistent and reduce stakeholder confusion. For example, California has established sea-level
rise guidelines, as have Florida and the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).

Transportation agencies may want to partner with other groups that have experience developing or
using climate projections. Useful sources of information and assistance include:
 State Climatologist – In some States, the State climatologist may be able to provide information on
current climate research projects and existing projections that you could use that are relevant to
your study region.
 University climate research centers located in your region may already be doing research on
regional climate projections, and may be able to provide available data or be interested in
partnering on your research effort.
 State and local environmental or other agencies may be able to help provide or develop necessary
data. For example, local agencies may have access to LiDAR data or other data relevant to coastal
mapping.
 Experts in the area who can offer advice or assistance in developing projections.
 Federal agencies such as NOAA, USGS, USACE that have data, modeling, historic weather data, and
future climate predictions.
 The emergency response community who have been dealing with and planning for regular all
hazards events; people whose knowledge and expertise of short term events can be extrapolated
into long term climate change possibilities.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 13

2.4.4

Examples from Practice: Identifying Climate Variables for Study

The differing objectives of the pilot studies resulted in a range of approaches:

Page 14

•

The San Francisco pilot limited its climate variables to sea level rise, storm surge and winddriven wave effects. Storm event impacts are already being experienced with the San Francisco
Bay, and future stronger and more frequent storms is likely to be the most burdensome, nearterm climate change impact to the region. The study selected sea level rise scenarios for midand end-of-century that were within the range of values included in the State of California Sea‐
Level Rise Interim Guidance Document (October 2010). The two sea level rise scenarios were
evaluated for three tide/Bay water level conditions (mean higher high water, the 100-year
extreme water level, and the 100-year extreme water level with wind-driven waves) by
leveraging regional modeling results from the USGS and FEMA.

•

The Gulf Coast 2 study examined temperature, precipitation, sea-level rise, and storm surge
variables. New, downscaled projections of temperature and precipitation for the study area
were developed for the study. Several temperature and precipitation values were chosen to be
projected, including a range of annual, seasonal, and extreme values [see Table 1]. Sea level rise
scenarios were developed based on literature reviews of global sea-level rise scenarios and an
assessment of historic subsidence/uplift rates specific to the area, and hurricane scenarios were
developed using historic storms as a base source of data.

•

The Oahu MPO pilot looked at potential sea-level rise, storm surge, wind, high intensity rainfall,
drought, and temperature effects on critical assets on the island of Oahu. The study made use of
climate projections from published literature and storm surge modeling from University of
Hawaii research conducted for FEMA.

•

The New Jersey pilot looked at sea-level rise, storm surge, extreme temperatures and
temperature ranges, extreme and average precipitation, drought, and inland flooding. The pilot
benefitted from assistance from their State Climatologist, and hired a consultant to develop
downscaled climate projections for the study area. The pilot also analyzed future floodplain
expansion using a regression model developed in a FEMA-sponsored study. Inputs to the model
included current and future climate variables.

•

The WSDOT pilot considered all known climate threats in the Pacific Northwest: sea level rise,
precipitation change, temperature change, and fire risk. The study used climate projections
funded and endorsed by an act of the Washington State Legislature for use in adaptation
studies, developed by the University of Washington Climate Impacts Group.

•

The Virginia pilot considered sea-level rise, storm surge, extreme temperature events, and
enhanced precipitation.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

Table 1:
Climate Variables Used in the Gulf Coast Phase 2 Study
Variable

Mode
Multi

Analysis
Pavement design

Annual, seasonal, and monthly average minimum, maximum,
and mean temperature

Airports

Runway design

Daily high temperature: mean, 50%, 95%, and warmest day
in the year during each 30-yr period

Rail

AREMA rail design/
buildings

Civil/
Geotech/
Pavement

Comparing high temp
days’ duration to
existing design
standards

Mean, 5%, 25%, 50%, 75%, 95%, and largest occurrences for
the average minimum air temperature over four consecutive
days in winter, and the average maximum temperature over
four consecutive days in summer

Bridge /Rail

Comparisons to AASHTO
recommendations

Mean, 50%, 90%, 95%, and 99% occurrence of the coldest day
of the year during each 30-yr period

Multi

Pavement design

Maximum 7-day average air temperature per year with the %
probability of occurrence during each 30-yr period (mean,
50%, 90%, 95%, 99% occurrence)

Multi

Pavement design
(asphalt)

Exceedance probability precipitation for 24-hour period with
a 0.2%, 1%, 2%, 5%, 10%, 20%, and 50% exceedance
precipitation events (e.g., 500-yr, 100-yr, 50-yr)

Multi

Drainage/liquid storage

24-hour exceedance probabilities based on today’s 0.2%, 1%,
2%, 5%, 10%, 20%, and 50% exceedance precipitation events

Multi

Drainage

Exceedance probability precipitation across four consecutive
days: 0.2%, 1%, 2%, 5%, 10%, 20%, 50%, mean; Exceedance
probability of precipitation across two consecutive days:
0.2%, 1%, 2%, 5%, 10%, 20%, 50%, mean

Pipeline

Historical analysis
of inundation

Multi

Change in storm events

Annual, seasonal and monthly precipitation

Seasonal and annual number of days and maximum
consecutive days of high temperatures at or above 95oF,
100oF, 105oF, and 110 oF

Largest 3-day total of precipitation each season

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 15

2.4.5

Resources for Identifying Key Climate Variables

Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies, FHWA 2010. This
document provides basic information on projected future climate change effects over the near term,
mid-century and end-of-century by U.S. region.
The Use of Climate Information in Vulnerability Assessments, FHWA 2011. This memorandum focuses
on the use of climate information when performing a vulnerability assessment. The memorandum
includes discussion of using historical climate information and includes information on potential data
sources.

3

Assessing Vulnerability

Once the objectives and scope of the study have been defined, including a general outline of relevant
infrastructure and climate variables, practitioners can begin to assess the vulnerability of their assets.
The form, level of effort, and detail of the vulnerability assessment will vary based on the identified
objectives, goals, and other factors. The ultimate goal of the assessment is to determine how climate
change may impact the transportation assets included in the study. The findings of the assessment can
then be integrated into transportation decision-making processes and used to consider and prioritize
measures to address the vulnerabilities.
The assessment step in the framework will use the preliminary information and data on the relevant
climate variables and assets collected during the scoping of the study. However, data collection begun
as a part of project scoping will continue during the vulnerability assessment. Data collection is an
iterative, on-going process and is an integral part of the assessment.
Climate change and extreme weather vulnerability in the transportation context is a function of a
transportation system’s sensitivity to climate effects, exposure to climate effects, and adaptive capacity.
Sensitivity refers to how the asset or system fares when exposed to an impact. Related to sensitivity are
asset climate thresholds-the specific climate and environmental characteristics such as temperatures,
water flow, or precipitation pattern that may warrant changes to the transportation asset design or
materials. Section 3.1 discusses developing information on asset sensitivity to climate.
Exposure refers to whether the asset or system is located in an area experiencing direct impacts of
climate change, such as temperature and precipitation changes, or indirect impacts, such as sea-level
rise. To determine exposure, information on asset location, ideally including elevation information, is
combined with information on the extent of the climate impacts of concern. Section 3.2 discusses asset
data collection, and Section 3.3 discusses climate inputs.
Adaptive capacity refers to the systems’ ability to adjust to cope with existing climate variability or
future climate impacts. Are there alternate routes? How easily might impacted assets be modified to
adjust to changing climate conditions? Section 3.5 discusses adaptive capacity.
Information for vulnerability assessments can come in many forms ranging from quantitative data
driven GIS or spreadsheet computations to qualitative stakeholder engagement analyses based on local
knowledge of vulnerabilities. In practice, a vulnerability assessment may incorporate elements of both
qualitative and quantitative analyses, and there is no one-size-fits-all approach. Spatial and temporal
scale, objectives, and access to resources all may dictate different techniques.

Page 16

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

3.1

Developing Information on Asset Sensitivity to Climate

A necessary step in a vulnerability assessment is identifying the ways in which the transportation assets
you are studying are sensitive to changes in the climate or to extreme weather events—that is, what are
the kinds of impacts they can experience, and at what thresholds are these impacts felt? There are a
number of different approaches that have been used to identify these sensitivities.
One source for sensitivity and threshold information are the standards or guidelines developed by State
DOTs or other industry organizations, such as standards for designing, constructing, and maintaining
infrastructure. Design standards and guidelines can be used to isolate specific climate stressors relevant
to a particular asset. The relationships provided within design standards can also be used to provide
quantitative indicators of an asset’s sensitivity to a particular climate stressor. Transportation
infrastructure is designed according to standards and guidelines that are based on detailed sets of
empirical tests, asset-specific quantitative models, and other engineering analyses. Engineers use these
documents to ensure that a design meets the functional specifications of a project within accepted
limits and factors of safety. Design standards and guidance consider relevant climate variables—both
typical climate characteristics in which the design will operate, as well as infrequent events such as
violent storms, floods, and hurricanes, whose occurrence is estimated through design return periods for
each hazard.
Related to design standards are design elements or relationships. For example a narrow, steep stream
may be more sensitive to increased flow than a relatively flat stream with wide floodplains. The narrow
stream may react more quickly and severely with rapidly rising water surface elevations and increased
velocities, whereas a flat wide floodplain may be able to distribute and store the increased flow,
effectively dampening the impacts. Relationships such as structure opening area to watershed size,
shape and slope may be useful as proxies for broad screens of sensitivity to increasing precipitation.
Incised streams, eroding stream banks, scour holes, presence of debris and signs of head cutting or
presence of vertical grade control structures can also provide warnings signs of sensitivity to increased
flow and instability. The ratio of culvert span or diameter to ponding depth at a roadway sag point may
also provide clues as to how much extra capacity that culvert might have available to it. All these
“proxy” relationships are useful for the initial sensitivity screening of assets in that they are usually
easier to detect or measure without having to perform more complicated hydraulic computations.
Another approach is to draw upon an agency’s experiences with system performance in the past,
especially during extreme weather conditions such as high temperature, heavy precipitation, flooding,
coastal storms, or prolonged lack of precipitation. Examining transportation system performance during
historic weather events can aid in understanding the sensitivity of the transportation system to weather
extremes and put the projected changes into context, teasing out the types of weather events and
thresholds that caused impacts to transportation facilities and operations. This information can be used
to gauge impacts associated with future climate conditions.
An assessment of past weather-related disruption and damage might consider:
•
•
•
•
•

Weather-related sources of disruption to transportation services.
Transportation assets currently affected by weather extremes.
Damage to roads or bridges, or supporting infrastructure (e.g., culverts).
Thresholds at which the system begins to experience impacts (e.g., a specific high temperature,
an amount of precipitation within a day or over several days that has led to damage or failure)
Locations within the system that experience impacts.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 17

Some of this information can be gleaned from existing studies; for example, if case studies exist on
failures of particular bridges or roads tied to weather extremes, these can be useful to develop an
understanding of the variables that caused failure. Where sufficient data are available (and in a readily
accessible format), maintenance and engineering logs can be consulted to find out more specifically
what types of weather events caused particular failures. This can range from the particular storm
surge level that closed a bridge temporarily (for safety concerns) or that caused damage to the bridge;
the levels of precipitation and stream flow at particular gages tied to culvert failure. Or, it could
involve examining maintenance records, and looking for links between particular changes in the
conditions of pavement and heat events.
Finally, district engineers and maintenance personnel are very often quite knowledgeable on the
weaknesses or vulnerabilities of the current system. Eliciting their expert opinion on sensitivities of the
current system can provide another way to determine how climate can impact the assets in the study.
How often does a particular road flood, and what are the weather and environmental conditions that
cause it? What temperature levels lead to enhanced pavement rutting and more rapid pavement
replacement? Are there certain roads that have been flooded due to coastal storms, and if so, what
kind of damage occurred as a result of particular storms? Do particular areas flood regularly at high
tide with mild storms?
It is important to recognize, however, that typical historical climate conditions are unlikely to be
representative of all future climate conditions. Although analysis of the past can yield useful “analogs”
for certain types of weather events and the resulting impacts, the climate is changing and some future
climate impacts may go beyond the range of impacts that have occurred in the recent past.
Furthermore, it is unlikely that the trends of past decades will persist unchanged into the future;
especially on longer timescales (greater than 30 to 40 years) simply extending past trend lines into the
future may underestimate future changes. For example, for all parts of the United States, the rates of
warming for the 21st century are expected to be greater than the rate of warming between 1900 and
2000. Similarly, sea-level rise rates have increased in recent decades, and they are expected to
increase still more in coming decades.

3.2

Collecting Data on Assets

Often the data needed for a vulnerability analysis will be found in multiple data sources that were
designed for unrelated purposes and are not easily merged together. Not all data sets are of
comparable quality, or in an easily accessible format (e.g., digital, geo-spatially referenced). For
instance, facility elevation data may only exist in “as-built” diagrams stored on paper. Different pieces
of information on the condition of the system facilities, for instance, might be found in a bridge
database, a pavement asset management system, and paper copies of culvert inspection reports.
Some data needed may not be collected regularly at all. The challenges of this data integration may be
a factor in determining what data to collect for the analysis.
3.2.1

Examples from Practice: Experiences with Data Collection and Integration

In inventorying State-owned transportation assets, the WSDOT quickly found that the information it
wanted to use was found in multiple data sources and that the information varied widely in its level of
detail and the extent of descriptive information included. The project team had to allocate additional
time to convert the varied data into a format that could be used with other data in the WSDOT’s GIS
Workbench. Some data, such as information on repeat maintenance events that the team had hoped
Page 18

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
to use to identify current vulnerabilities, was only available in the form of individual paper
maintenance reports and was not practical to use for this effort. Similarly, sea level rise (SLR) analysis
proved to be very complex and difficult to determine. Without accurate elevation values for the
roadway and infrastructure, it was difficult to determine whether an asset would be affected by the
chosen sea level rise scenarios. Given time and resource constraints, GIS analysis was limited to
proximity of an asset to the sea-level rise layers used in the database.
The New Jersey pilot gathered data from numerous sources and collected it into a geo-database for
querying and analysis. Table 2 details the data included in the geo-database. The pilot team
experienced some challenges with the data integration. For instance, their method for determining
critical assets was largely dependent on traffic analysis zone (TAZ) information. As the two New Jersey
study areas crossed the boundaries of three MPOs, with three separate travel demand models, they
needed to create a unified TAZ structure for the analysis. This procedure was time consuming.
Agencies with robust asset management systems may have central asset inventories to use as a strong
starting point. For example, SEPTA, the transit provider for Philadelphia, had budgeted resources for
asset inventorying as part of an FTA-funded climate adaptation pilot. However, because of a recent
FTA-funded asset management grant, SEPTA had a robust asset inventory in place and was able to
significantly reduce resources devoted to this task.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 19

Table 2:
New Jersey Pilot Data Collection Matrix (for major assets).
Source NJTPA (2012)

Asset

GIS Data
NJDOT Congestion
Management System
1
(CMS)Network

Roadways
NJTPA Model Network
NJDOT Bridge
Management Data
Tables

Bridges

BTS NTAD
Tunnels

NJDOT Data Tables
NJ Transit

Passenger Rail

Freight Rail

Amtrak, BTS Data
BTS Data
DVRPC

Characteristics
NJDOT CMS data used for study area coverage and
volume data. Primarily higher Functional Class highways, a
few county roads and collectors included.
Does not cover the entire study area. Network is simplified
highway stick network. Network density is higher than CMS
Network and includes lower level functional classes
compared to CMS.
2009 BMS data used to create linear bridge location
shapefiles. NJDOT's bridge locations are point features and
do not include length attribute data.
National Bridge Inventory from BTS is an additional source
of bridge locations.
Tunnels feature class created from NJDOT's data tables by
linear referencing from the NJDOT highway centerline
feature class.
Feature classes used directly as received from NJ Transit.
BTS 2011 has Amtrak's network as a separate shapefile for
download.
Active Freight Rail data from Oak Ridge National
Laboratory Network.
Data made available from DVRPC, regional in extent.
A Unified TAZ structure was created by merging NJTPA,
SJTPO, and DVRPC's TAZ shapefiles. NJTPA's 2010
socio-economic data was used from the three data sources.

Traffic Analysis
Zones

NJTPA, SJTPO, and
DVRPC

Airports

NJDOT Data Tables,
BTS

Runway lengths, airport polygons.

Wetlands

NJDEP

Wetlands files provided by NJDEP.

Evacuation
Routes

NJGIN

NJDOT’s Highway Safety Improvement Program
Evacuation Route Shapefile.

BTS Data

Ports

DVRPC

Centerline bus routes shapefile from NJ Transit.

Bus Routes
Signals
Switches

Port and goods movement data provided by DVPRC.
NJ Transit shapefiles.

NJ Transit

Track

1

Traffic volume data, which is one of the determinants for highway criticality is not available for all features on NJDOT’s centerline
network. The CMS network data has link level traffic volume information for higher level functional class highways (primarily
interstates/freeways, major and minor arterials, and some urban collectors).

Page 20

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

3.3

Developing Climate Inputs for the Vulnerability Assessment

In addition to identifying infrastructure of interest, other key pieces of information that serve as inputs
to the vulnerability assessment include understanding the sensitivity (and adaptive capacity) of the
infrastructure to climate/weather events and, importantly, establishing the projected future climate
scenarios this infrastructure will be (or is projected to be) exposed to. Development of climate
information supports both the historic look at sensitivity and the assessment of future exposure:
•

Information on past climate can inform agency understanding of the kind of weather and climate
effects transportation to which assets are sensitive and can inform development of thresholds of
future climate effects that may affect those assets. Thresholds for analysis can be developed tied to
the sensitivities identified in looking at past impacts. The thresholds could be for a specific asset or a
system. For instance, there might be a mean sea-level value at a storm drain outlet that causes
hydraulic grade line (HGL) to go above ground somewhere in the system given the current design
storm calculations. Or there might be a sea-level rise value that causes 30 percent of current storm
drain systems to violate HGL and/or permanently causes standing water on 10 percent of the road
network. Another example involves precipitation. A practitioner could relate design flows to a
design storm event, then establish how much higher a design storm event could be so that a specific
culvert does not overtop, or 10 or 30 percent of total culverts do not overtop. For both sea-level rise
and precipitation (design storm event) one can calculate a rate of approach to the intolerable level
based on historical measurements.

•

Information on future weather patterns and climate change effects, which translates to potential
exposure faced by transportation assets, should include examination and selection of a range of
future climate scenarios and the effects associated with the scenarios. Projected changes in climate
may include projections of particular thresholds that are deemed to matter; thresholds can be
identified through a sensitivity analysis or in design standards.

The future climate is generally expressed in the form of scenario-based projections, rather than single
predictions. These reflect the various uncertainties involved in climate modeling—the amount of
greenhouse gases that will be emitted (which depends on the rate and nature of economic growth,
technological change, and mitigation policies), climate variability, and model uncertainty. The emission
scenarios are generally based on a standard set of scenarios developed for Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) assessments. Each scenario represents a future path of global societal
development, with assumptions regarding population growth, economic growth, and technological
change, resulting in different rates of growth in greenhouse gas emissions. In order to reduce the
uncertainty and bias resulting from using just one climate model, these scenarios have been used to
create outputs from more than twenty major global climate models. As a result, climate projections
span a range of values, for which probabilities cannot be easily assigned. This means that in order to
better assess future risks, the vulnerability assessment will need to be conducted with a range of climate
inputs, rather than a single climate scenario.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 21

3.3.1

Temperature and Precipitation

Projections of changes in temperature and precipitation can be complex. For general questions or for
issues covering large areas, broad geographic region modeling of changes in temperature and
precipitation may be sufficient. There are several reports 2 that provide this kind of information and use
it to assess impacts on particular regions of the United States and sectors within those regions. Regional
climate effects information can also help inform broad planning type questions, such as those where
broad trends in temperature and seasonal precipitation are of use. For other types of questions—
especially when the fate of specific transportation assets or areas of similar scale are the focus of the
analysis-- it is generally preferable to use more detailed information that has been processed to reflect
local features/topography and conditions. Such information and procedures for developing it are
becoming more available as progress is made on downscaling and regional modeling.
3.3.1.1

Examples from Practice: Temperature and Precipitation Projections

Approaches used in the New Jersey Pilot, the WSDOT Pilot, and Gulf Coast 2:
•

Modeling. Both the Gulf Coast 2 study and the New Jersey Pilot rely on statistical downscaling
methods applied to the study area. In the Gulf Coast study, the downscaling was done based on
historic temperature and precipitation information recorded at five stations in the Mobile region,
while in New Jersey eight stations were used. Washington State relied primarily on information
developed by the University of Washington Climate Impacts Group and other information developed
for the 2009 Washington Climate Change Impacts Assessment; the Washington’s Climate Impacts
Group downscaled information to the greater Columbia River basin.

•

Scenarios. The three efforts all used a range of global climate models and scenarios in developing
the information over a series of time periods. The New Jersey pilot used the B1 (low emissions), A1B
(moderate emissions), and A2 (high emissions) scenarios and used the results from 15 models.
Models were selected based on their ability to model precipitation for New Jersey. Gulf Coast 2
relied on model runs from 10 models for the B1 and A2, and four A1FI (high emissions based on
fossil fuel intensive growth) (A1FI has fewer model runs available); models were selected on their
ability to replicate results for North America, for both temperature and precipitation. Variables
were projected over three timeframes in Washington State and Mobile, and two timeframes in New
Jersey.

•

Extreme Values. In addition to directly-calculated variables (mean/high/low temperature and mean
precipitation) the assessments also developed projections for specific thresholds or extremes that
were derived from the model runs under each scenario. Examples include:
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

2

Page 22

Number of days above 95 ˚, 100 ˚, 105 ˚ F.
Maximum 7-day air temperature.
Average annual return period of rainfall events exceeding 1”, 2”, 4” per day.
Daily precipitation for a range of probability of occurrences (0.2%, 1%, 2%, 5%, etc.).
2-day and 4-day precipitation totals for a range of exceedance probabilities .
Maximum 5-day cumulative rainfall depth.
One percent-annual-chance flood discharge.

See USGCRP’s Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States (2009).

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

•

Estimating river flooding from heavy precipitation. For inland flooding from heavy rain, the New
Jersey pilot analyzed the impact of climate change on the 1-in-100 year floodplains. 3 To do this, the
project team used a national regression equation that was developed through a Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) study. 4 The inputs to the equation are total number of frost days
annually (days below freezing), maximum number of consecutive dry days annually, and maximum
5-day rainfall during a given year (mm). 5 The project team generated these inputs specific to the
study area through analysis of climate models.
Using the statistical methods described above, the estimated future floodplains in the study areas
were an average 8 percent, 40 percent, and 59 percent wider in 2050 than the current 1-in-100-year
flood plain under the low, medium, and high emissions scenarios 6, respectively, and an average
17 percent, 80 percent and 178 percent wider than current floodplains in 2100. 81 miles of
roadways, 1120 transit bus route miles, and 26 NJ Transit track miles lie in the projected
1-in-100 year floodplain for 2100 under the medium emissions scenario.

3.3.2

Sea-Level Rise and Storm Surge

Sea-level rise and storm surge are potentially among the most destructive impacts climate change can
bring to coastal transportation infrastructure. In order to characterize exposure, most studies of sealevel rise and storm surge risk rely on spatial analysis of projected inundation. The GIS can be used to
map inundated areas by analyzing areas of land that fall below increased water levels under different
scenarios of sea-level rise (also called the “bathtub model”), while more sophisticated approaches
account for erosion, subsidence, and natural and man-made barriers that may protect certain areas
from inundation, or even model the flows of water over the landscape.
As described by NOAA (2009), inundation mapping involves the following key steps:
1. Gather elevation data and elevation surfaces for coastal land areas (includes calibrating
elevation to local tidal elevations); 7
2. Project sea-level rise and/or storm surge scenarios;
3. Use GIS to overlay the water surfaces onto the digital elevation map in order to identify
inundation areas; 8
3

The 1-in-100 year floodplain, also called 100 year flood or 1% flood, is the land area flooded during a heavy rain
event that has a 1% chance of occurring in any given year, or in other words, on average, once every one hundred
years.
4

Thomas et al., “Effects of Climate Change on the National Flood Insurance Program in the United States –
Riverine Flooding” Watershed Management 2010, ASCE, 2011.
5

These are the variables found in the FEMA study to be most highly correlated with the 1% annual chance flood
discharge, in cubic feet per second.

6

The emissions scenarios are those developed by the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). The low scenario refers to the IPCC B1 scenario, the medium to A1B, and the high to A2.

7

Calibration often involves the choice of a vertical datum. As defined by NOAA (2011), “A datum is a base
elevation used as a reference from which to reckon heights or depths. A tidal datum is a standard elevation defined
by a certain phase of the tide. Tidal datums are used as references to measure local water levels.” Example tidal
datums include mean higher high water and mean high water.

8

The sea-level rise projection must be chosen to account for the vertical accuracy of the elevation data for the land
(and vice versa). An accurate map requires the root mean square error of the elevation data to be smaller than the

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 23

Projections of global, or “eustatic,” sea-level rise scenarios can be found in the results from the IPCC or
other globally focused studies. Projections of local sea-level rise can be made more sophisticated by
accounting for a range of additional factors that influence water levels at regional and local scales, such
as:
•

•

•

In some locations, uplift or subsidence of the land surface can have a significant effect on the
rate of relative (or local) rise of sea level. Assessing changes in land subsidence or uplift is
relatively straightforward. Historic rates can be calculated and then be factored into
projections; this assumes that future rates will match historic rates.
Other factors, including changes in currents, salinity/density, and perhaps wind patterns can
have an impact on sea levels. These types of changes are less well understood, though the
science is evolving. For instance, on the coastline between North Carolina and Massachusetts,
sea-level rise rates have been much higher than the global average for the last two decades, and
the trend is expected to continue. Sea-level rise rates in the area are thought to be influenced
by changes in water temperature, salinity and density in the North Atlantic. 9
Ongoing coastal processes, such as changes in tidal flow and sediment volume, can also have a
major impact on shoreline characteristics. Barrier islands and wetlands (which may be a critical
defense against storm surge) may migrate or disappear, and storms, waves, and currents will
continually modify the landscape as the sea-level rises and exposes more land to wave action.

Storm surge scenarios can be developed from a number of different sources. Some of the most
frequently used options include:
•

•
•

•

Using data from NOAA tide gauges on the highest observed water level (HOWL) and combining
that with sea-level rise information to project the impacts of future sea-level rise and known
storm impacts. The HOWL measures the highest water level at a particular station, which is
linked to a particular storm (See The Potential Impacts of Global Sea Level Rise on
Transportation Infrastructure). Unfortunately, this method has its problems, as gauges
sometimes do not survive storms.
Mapping the exposure under past storms, and adding in sea-level rise (a version of the “bathtub
model” approach)
Modeling storms to include sea-level rise in the modeling. Computational models such as
ADCIRC or SLOSH estimate storm surge heights for historical or hypothetical storms based on
the topography for a specific locale. This approach is the most sophisticated and resource
intensive approach. (The Gulf Coast 2 study and the New Jersey Pilot used this approach.)
Leveraging ongoing or past regional modeling efforts. The San Francisco study used regional
models including the TRIM2D model results from USGS and FEMA Mike modeling conducted for
an ongoing bay flood study. Other localities may have regional modeling of extreme tides,
storm surge, or sea-level rise.

Although a simple “bathtub” approach may indicate the relative risk among areas, it may not serve as a
“prediction” for how the future landscape will appear, and thus may not capture all of the vulnerabilities
projected change in sea-level rise (NOAA 2009). For more in-depth discussion of land elevation data resolution and
accuracy, see Chapter 2 of CCSP (2009).
9

Page 24

http://www.usgs.gov/newsroom/article.asp?ID=3256&from=rss_home

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
faced in a particular locale. Typically, such limitations are not critical for identifying areas at risk at broad
spatial scales (e.g., regionally or nationally) or communicating these risks to the general public.
However, they may be important to keep in mind when such maps are used for local land use planning.
The utility and accuracy of a sea-level rise and storm surge assessments depend in part on the resolution
of the underlying elevation data. One standard source of elevation data, the USGS National Elevation
Dataset, supplies elevation data with a horizontal resolution of 30m and 10m and vertical resolution of
around +/-2.4m. However, global projected sea-level rise of up to 2m by the end of the 21st century falls
within this +/-2.4m resolution. As such, maps based on the NED will generally not provide accurate
predictions of exposure of specific assets. In order to obtain more useful elevation information, local
assessments will likely need to rely on digital elevation models derived from high resolution LiDAR (Light
Detection and Ranging) data. These data are not available in all locations, and require additional
processing to use, including adjustments to the vertical datum to ensure consistency across datasets. 10
3.3.2.1

Examples from Practice:
Sea-Level Rise and Storm Surge Approaches and Other Considerations:

•

Elevation data — Most of the Pilots used high resolution LiDAR data, however, the Virginia
Pilot used the National Elevation Dataset (NED) to supplement the LiDAR data for areas left out.
LiDAR has a much higher vertical resolution, and is better for cases where project and planning
decisions will be made. LiDAR data have become increasingly available in recent years, and it is
a good idea to check with city or county agencies and the NOAA Coastal Service Center’s Digital
Coast to see if LiDAR data are available.

•

Sea level rise scenarios – Various studies examine a range of 0.3 to 2 meters of sea level rise
by 2100. It is a good idea to work with your State or local environmental counterpart to
establish sea-level rise ranges; in some cases, the State or local area may already have mandates
to consider specific ranges of sea-level rise. In New Jersey, the Department of Environmental
Protection (and the New Jersey Pilot) chose to look at three increments: 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 meters.
The San Francisco Pilot looked at 16 inches (0.4 meters) and 55 inches (1.4 meters) of sea-level
rise. The Oahu Pilot examined impacts tied to 0.75 and 1.9 meters. The Gulf Coast 2 project is
looking at 0.3, 0.75, and 2.0 meters.

•

Local sea level rise adjustment – Local sea-level rise can differ from global sea-level rise due
to a number of factors mentioned above, including factors such as subsidence/uplift of the land,
wind patterns, salinity and density of the water, and some of these factors are better
understood than others. Some studies have tried to account for these factors. For example, the
New Jersey pilot accounted for local subsidence as well as salinity and temperature. Gulf Coast
2 factors in estimates of subsidence/uplift in the Mobile region based on recent satellite
measurements and gauge estimates. In the Gulf Coast 1 project, rates of subsidence were
calculated at three tide gauge stations and used to represent the subsidence rates for the whole
Gulf Coast region. In the Gulf Coast 2 project, which focuses on one city on the Gulf Coast, rates
of subsidence/uplift were calculated for multiple areas in Mobile using changes in benchmark
surveys and satellite data. The two studies serve to bookend the range of options, and levels of

10

Adjustments to the vertical datum are a necessary part of mapping inundation. The land elevation data are usually
referenced to a vertical datum called the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). This data is not tidal,
meaning that a value of 0 does not equate to any particular local tide value. Correcting this issue requires converting
the elevation data from NAVD88 to a tidal datum, such as mean high tide (NOAA, 2011).

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 25

sophistication, for calculating subsidence information. (This way of looking at historic change
also subsumes other factors, in addition to vertical land movement.)
•

Storm surge analysis – Analyzing the effects of storm surge can involve examining past storms

combined with projected future sea-level rise and/or changes in storms tied to climate change.
Various methods may be appropriate, depending on whether the results will be used for an
initial screen or used to make project-level decisions. A less resource intensive (and less precise)
option involves using the GIS to map combined sea-level rise and past storm surge levels; this
can be done using the NOAA tide gauge data tied to past storms (that is, the highest observed
water level (HOWL)). Modeling past storms using SLOSH or, using a model like ADCIRC, with
adjustments to SLR or other factors is another option. Models can also be applied to model
wave heights occurring on top of storm surge. Running a model like ADCIRC is quite resourceintensive, and few MPOs or DOTs have staff familiar with this model, though a model of its
sophistication may be necessary to analyze project level impacts. The New Jersey pilot used
SLOSH to look at several different storm scenarios. Gulf Coast 1 used SLOSH, and Gulf Coast 2 is
using ADCIRC to examine the impacts of multiple storm surge scenarios. The San Francisco pilot
leveraged existing FEMA modeling to obtain surge and wave height data to create inundation
maps.
•

Top-down guidance on sea level rise projections – Several State governments and

government agencies have issued requirements or recommendations on assumptions for sea
level rise for use in project development. Examples include California and the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, which is responsible for overseeing navigable waters in the United States.
California issued guidance on sea level rise in 2010 that mandated that all State agencies
consider a range of sea level rise scenarios for 2050 and 2100; the California Department of
Transportation issued its own guidance in 2011 that includes a range of sea level rise increments
over the coming decades and a process for considering whether and how to include sea level
rise projections in project planning. 11 The San Francisco Pilot examined transportation
vulnerability to two sea level rise scenarios, 16 inches by mid-century and 55 inches by end of
century, which was consistent with the California guidance. Similarly, the U.S. Army Corps
released a guidance memo in 2011 that notes that sea-level rise needs to be considered on its
projects and includes information on projected ranges of sea-level rise; the document also
includes a step-by-step process to help users calculate and incorporate a range of local sea-level
rise estimates. 12
•

Accounting for shoreline protections, wind, and waves – The San Francisco pilot took

shoreline assets (wetlands, levees, and similar features) into account when determining the
vulnerability of coastal transportation assets. This provides more actionable information than
simpler studies that only identify areas lying below a certain elevation. The pilot categorized
stretches of shoreline in a GIS mapping exercise into the following five categories:

11

California DOT: Guidance on Incorporating Sea Level Rise (2011).
http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/tpp/offices/orip/Updated_Climate_Change/Documents/Sea_Level_Guidance_May2011.p
df . See also: State of California Sea-Level Rise Interim Guidance Document (2010).
12

Sea-Level Change Considerations for Civil Works Programs (2011) EC 1165-2-212
http://planning.usace.army.mil/toolbox/library/ECs/EC11652212Nov2011.pdf

Page 26

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Engineered flood protection structures (levees, flood walls)
Engineered shoreline protection structures (bulkheads, revetments)
Non-engineered berms
Wetlands (natural, managed, tidal flats)
Natural shorelines (non-wetland)

These five categories are ordered above from those that provide the most potential protection
from inundation to the transportation infrastructure behind them to those that provide the
least potential for inhibiting inland inundation. The project team grouped the individual
shoreline assets into larger systems of protection that protected a certain area. The team
examined the sea level rise scenarios under three conditions: high tide, 100-year extreme water
level from storms, and 100-year extreme water level coupled with wind waves. The team then
analyzed the depth of water overtopping the asset and what percent of the length of the
shoreline asset system is overtopped.
3.3.3

Resources for Developing Climate Inputs for the Vulnerability Assessment

Reports:
Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation Agencies, FHWA 2010. This
document provides basic information on projected future climate change effects over the near term,
mid-century and end-of-century by U.S. region.
Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States, US Global Change Research Program 2009. This
report summarizes the impacts of climate change on the United States, looking at different regions and
economic sectors.
The Use of Climate Information in Vulnerability Assessments, FHWA 2011. This memorandum focuses
on the use of climate information when performing a vulnerability assessment. The memorandum
includes discussion of using historical climate information and includes information on potential data
sources.
Climate Projections FAQ, U.S. Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station. This guidebook focuses
on understanding and interpreting downscaled climate projections.
Databases:
Websites for historical weather and climate data available from the NOAA National Climatic Data Center
include:
•
•
•
•
•

Comprehensive U.S. climate data available at: http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/climatemonitoring/index.php#us-icon
US Historical Climate Network (USHCN) data:
http://cdiac.ornl.gov/epubs/ndp/ushcn/ushcn.html
Data & Products http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/ncdc.html
Climate data online http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/search
U.S. climate maps available at: http://cdo.ncdc.noaa.gov/cgi-bin/climaps/climaps.pl

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 27

Data sources that have projections of future climate change from many different models for various
emissions scenarios include:
•

Statistically downscaled data from the World Climate Research Programme's Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project phase 3 (CMIP3): http://gdodcp.ucllnl.org/downscaled_cmip_projections/dcpInterface.html

•

Dynamically downscaled data from the North American Regional Climate Change Assessment
Program (NARCCAP): http://www.narccap.ucar.edu/. In addition, a new project funded by
USGS is developing a comprehensive web-based dataset of high-resolution (downscaled) climate
change projections for the entire United States

•

American Association of State Climatologists http://www.stateclimate.org/

Many university climate centers have also developed their own climate projection datasets.

3.4

Identifying and Rating Potential Vulnerabilities

There are multiple ways to combine the climate and asset information to identify potential
vulnerabilities, ranging from a desk review GIS or spreadsheet analysis to a stakeholder elicitation based
on local knowledge of current vulnerabilities, or a combination of both.
With the desk review approach, data on assets and projected climate are combined via a geospatial map
or other analytical tool to identify potential vulnerabilities. Projected climate change impacts are
represented in a GIS format along with information on the relevant assets (such as elevation, geographic
location, and existing flood protection) to determine potentially vulnerable areas.
With the stakeholder input approach, potential vulnerabilities are identified by stakeholders with
intimate knowledge of study area facilities. Through workshops and/or interviews, local transportation
practitioners draw from their knowledge and experience to consider how changes in climate may impact
transportation facilities within their purview.
3.4.1

Page 28

Examples from Practice: Identifying and Rating Vulnerabilities

•

The San Francisco Pilot used a desk review approach. They considered exposure, sensitivity, and
adaptive capacity of assets in their assessment of sea-level rise vulnerability, giving each asset
ratings of high, medium, and low for the three criteria. They then developed an overall
vulnerability rating for each asset based on the ratings of the three criteria.

•

The New Jersey Pilot used the desk review approach. To identify vulnerable facilities from sealevel rise, storm surge, and inland flooding, they used GIS to determine intersections between
inundated areas and transportation assets. They converted the climate scenarios’ projected
inundation extents from raster format into polygons and conducted an intersect analysis to
determine the overlap with transportation asset lines and points. Results were illustrated in GIS
maps and exported to table format as in Figure 3 and Table 3, in this case indicating roadways
that would be inundated by one meter of sea level rise in the coastal study area.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

Figure 3: Roadways Inundated by 1 meter of sea level rise, coastal study area.
Source: NJTPA (2011), Cambridge Systematics.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 29

Table 3: Roadway miles inundated by 1 meter of sea level rise, coastal study area.
Source NJTPA (2011), Cambridge Systematics

Roadway Type
Major Urban
Minor Urban
Major Rural
Minor Rural
Total
Evacuation Routes
NJ Transit Bus Routes
•

Page 30

Criticality Tier
Extreme High
0.75
11.69
0.02
0.30
1.26
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.03
11.99

Med/Low
28.50
3.93
0.14
1.83
34.40

Total
40.93
4.26
1.40
1.83
48.42
86.90
657.88

Increase
from 2050
29.62
3.57
0.89
1.19
35.27
71.50
623.18

The WSDOT pilot adapted a long-standing cost/risk assessment workshop model to gather
stakeholder input. The study team held workshops around the State with WSDOT employees
who knew each area well, such as the maintenance supervisor and their staff. Study organizers
asked “What keeps you up at night?” to help identify current vulnerabilities that may be
exacerbated in the future. Using projected climate information from the University of
Washington and other available information, workshop participants considered likely future
climate changes to sea level, temperature, precipitation, wind, and fire risks. They then assigned
an impact rating to each highway segment or asset ranging from 1 to 10 using an impact rating
scale scorecard (Table 4). The WSDOT’s workshop participants considered asset criticality
ratings as they rated the vulnerability of each facility or segment of highway. The ratings from
the workshops were collected into a central database and used to create maps identifying the
vulnerability level of each roadway segment or asset.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

Table 4: The WSDOT Workshop Impact Rating Scale.

Source: WSDOT (2011), Adapted from Oregon Transportation Research and Education Consortium – Risk
Assessment Presentation

7

8

9

10

Complete Failure
Results in total loss or ruin of asset. Asset
may be available for limited use after at least
60 days and would require major repair or
rebuild over an extended period of time.
“Complete and/or catastrophic failure”
typically involves:
Immediate road closure.
Travel disruptions.
Vehicles forced to reroute to other roads.
Reduced commerce in affected areas.
Reduced or eliminated access to some
destinations.
May sever some utilities. May damage
drainage conveyance or storage systems.






4

5

6

Temporary Operational Failure

Results in minor damage and/or disruption
to asset. Asset would be available with either
full or limited use within 60 days.
“Temporary operational failure” typically
involves:
 Temporary road closure, hours to weeks.
 Reduced access to destinations served by
the asset.
 Stranded vehicles.

Possible temporary utility failures.

3

“Reduced capacity” typically involves:

1

Results in little or negligible impact to asset.
Asset would be available with full use within
10 days and has immediate limited use still
available.

2

Reduced Capacity

 Less convenient travel.
 Occasional/brief lane closures, but roads
remain open.
 Some vehicles may move to alternate
routes.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 31

3.5

Considering Adaptive Capacity

Adaptive capacity refers to the ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including climate
variability and extremes) to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope
with the consequences.
One way in which a transportation system can have greater adaptive capacity is if it has redundant
routes or modes. For instance, if a particular roadway segment is impassable due to flooding, the
availability of parallel routes or alternative modes can continue to enable travel between destinations.
The New Jersey pilot considered this aspect of adaptive capacity during its criticality screen. The pilot
ranked assets as more highly critical if there were no alternative routes available.
Another relevant criterion is how easily and quickly service can be restored to a segment or asset
following a climate-related disruption. The Gulf Coast 2 Study, for instance, is using two measurements
to evaluate how quickly service could be restored to a given segment: replacement costs and time
duration of disruptions. Replacement costs can provide a rough proxy for the ease in which assets could
be repaired or replaced; resources are more easily mobilized for lower cost repairs, and replacement
costs indicate overall complexity, size, and expense of the asset itself. Length of time for the disruption
to clear (for instance, for debris to be cleared from a rail line following a storm) is an indicator of how
well the system can deal with the climate impact. The availability of staffing and resources for
preventive measures can also increase adaptive capacity. For instance, SEPTA, the public transportation
provider for Philadelphia, provides the example of deploying maintenance crews prior to an expected
storm to trim trees along rail lines in order to minimize potential for wind-blown debris from trees to
block the tracks.
Key considerations for evaluating adaptive capacity include 13:
•
•
•
•
•

Is the system already able to accommodate changes in climate?
Are there barriers to a system's ability to accommodate changes in climate?
Is the system already stressed in ways that will limit the ability to accommodate changes in climate?
Is the rate of projected climate change likely to be faster than the adaptability of the system?
Are there efforts already underway to address impacts of climate change related to the system?

Ultimately, the vulnerability assessment will aid transportation decision-makers in prioritizing actions
and determining how to improve the adaptive capacity of the system.

3.6

Incorporating Likelihood and Risk

In addition to determining whether an asset may be impacted by climate change, it can also be
important to understand just how vulnerable the assets are. Information on risk and the timeframe of
the risk are useful for determining whether climate change should be considered in project
13

Snover, A.K., L. Whitely Binder, J. Lopez, E. Willmott , J. Kay, D. Howell and J. Simmonds. 2007. Preparing for
Climate Change: A Guidebook for Local, Regional and State Governments. In association with and published by
ICLEI - Local Governments for Sustainability, Oakland , CA .

Page 32

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
development, prioritizing actions, and weighing adaptation options. However, assigning risk associated
with climate change vulnerability is imprecise. It is not possible to apply a certain likelihood to a climate
scenario. And further, climate models do not all agree. This section provides a brief overview of
assessing climate risk to transportation assets, discusses some of the challenges to assigning a specific
risk, and offers examples of some ways transportation agencies have incorporated likelihood and risk
into their vulnerability assessments.
3.6.1

Assessing Risk

A risk assessment integrates the severity or consequence of an impact with the probability or likelihood
that an asset will experience a particular impact. To determine consequence, transportation agencies
may wish to consider the level of use of an asset, the degree of redundancy in the system, or the value
of an asset (in terms of cost of replacement, economic loss, environmental impacts, cultural value, or
loss of life). The consequence of projected impacts may have been a component of the vulnerability
assessment discussed in Section 3.4.
Determining the probability of occurrence, or likelihood, of future climate impacts, can be problematic.
As mentioned above, it is not possible to apply a particular likelihood to a climate scenario, and climate
models do not all agree. With the absence of information on the likelihood of specific climate impacts,
climate impact studies will often use separate risk matrices for a range of possibility with a “low
emissions” scenario and a “high emissions” scenario, or a range of emissions scenarios, as discussed in
Section 3.3. These studies will also use several climate models, often averaging results of those that
most accurately model past regional climate, and characterizing impacts that occur under all the models
“highly likely.” The resultant impact projections will be split into high- to low-likelihood groupings, with
the caveat that the climate may be more or less sensitive than we think. Depending on objectives and
study scope, the study team may want to choose projections from one scenario or a range of scenarios.
To the extent that information is available, impacts will be split into high- to low-likelihood groupings.
In general, there is much more certainty regarding the direction of change than there is regarding the
magnitude of change, or the length of time it will take to reach a change. For this reason, an agency
may want to consider impacts that are fairly certain to happen at some point this century, even if there
is some uncertainty regarding whether the impacts will occur in 2050 or 2080. With information on
consequence and likelihood, agencies can categorize assets into groups:
•

Assets that have a low likelihood of being impacted by a future climate condition and a low
consequence of being impacted by that condition.

•

Assets that have a low likelihood of being impacted by a future climate condition and a high
consequence of being impacted by that condition.

•

Assets that have a high likelihood of being impacted by a future climate condition and a low
consequence of being impacted by that condition.

•

Assets that have a high likelihood of being impacted by a future climate condition and a high
consequence of being impacted by that condition.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 33

The integrated risk is often represented by a two-dimensional matrix that classifies risks into three
categories (low, moderate, high) based on the combined effects of their likelihood and consequence. An
example matrix risk rating matrix used by the San Francisco Pilot is provided in Figure 4.

Likelihood

Consequence

Risk

1
2
3
4
5
Low

1

2

3

4

5

2
3
4
5
6

3
4
5
6
7

4
5
6
7
8

5
6
7
8
9

6
7
8
9
10

Moderate

High

High Risk (Red)
Unacceptable, major disruption likely; priority management attention required.
Moderate Risk (Orange)
Some disruption; additional management attention may be needed.
Low Risk (Green)
Minimum impact; minimum oversight needed to ensure risk remains low.

Figure 4: Risk Rating Matrix.

Source: Adapting to Rising Tides: Transportation Vulnerability and Risk Assessment Pilot Project, November 2011

3.6.2
•

Page 34

Examples from Practice: Assessing Risk
The San Francisco pilot assessed risk of sea-level rise to two to three representative assets per
asset type identified as most vulnerable. The project team limited their study scope to “likely”
sea-level rise scenarios in both mid-century and end of century, thus they considered likelihood
of impact to be the same for all assets in the small study area. The study team acknowledged
that the while the projections used for mid-century (16 inches) and end of century (55 inches)
were not definitively tied to a specific date, the Bay will experience the amount of sea level rise
evaluated at some point in the future. They developed a consequence rating for each asset
included in the risk assessment by averaging ratings of six criteria. They combined likelihood
and consequence ratings to calculate an overall risk rating for each asset.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
•

The Oahu MPO pilot used three day-long group work sessions of an interdisciplinary project
team to assess integrated risk to the five priority assets in their study. At the work sessions, the
team discussed likelihood, magnitude, and consequence to society of future climate change
impacts to each asset. Facility operators and other subject matter experts provided past
experience of the facilities to natural disasters and emergencies. Table 5 summarizes some of
the results of the integrated risk assessments, in this case the risk of sea-level rise to Honolulu
International Airport.

Table 5:
Sea-Level Rise Risk Assessment for Honolulu International Airport, Oahu MPO (2011).

Risk Level in
Year 2050

Risk Level in
Year 2100

•

3.6.3

TheBus 811 Middle Street
HDOT Highways Division
Oahu District Baseyard
727 Kakoi Street
Honolulu International Airport
and Access
TheBus
811 Middle Street
HDOT Highways Division
Oahu District Baseyard
727 Kakoi Street
Honolulu International Airport
and Access

Low Vulnerability, Low Structural Impact
Low-Moderate Vulnerability, Low Structural Impact
Low Vulnerability, Low Structural Impact
Low-Moderate Vulnerability, Low-Moderate
Structural Impact
High Vulnerability, High Structural Impact
Low-Moderate Vulnerability, Low Structural Impact

Rather than conducting a risk assessment per se, the New Jersey pilot developed a range of
scenarios designed to capture the potential range of possibilities. The scenarios were not
assigned specific likelihoods. The team used a total of three climate scenarios: low, medium,
and high emissions (the B1, A1B, and A2 scenarios) for both 2050 and 2100. They applied the
lowest emissions scenario to the least aggressive of 15 climate models that were deemed to
best replicate the local climate, the medium emissions scenario to the median climate model,
and the high emissions scenario to the most aggressive climate model, thereby creating a range
of projections. Similarly, for sea-level rise they selected low, medium, and high scenarios for
2050 and 2100 in consultation with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
The study team recommended that NJ jurisdictions use the range of scenarios developed for the
study to examine their assets in more detail. They recommend using the high emissions/most
aggressive model scenario to analyze impacts to the most critical infrastructure, and the low
emissions/least aggressive scenario to analyze impacts to the least critical infrastructure.
However, to narrow the scope of their pilot study, the project team performed an analysis of all
assets in the study area based on the medium scenario.
Resource for Assessing Risk

Literature Review: Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment, Risk Assessment, and Adaptation
Approaches, FHWA, July 2009. This document details how vulnerability, risk, and adaptation
assessments have been or could be used to integrate climate change impacts into transportation
decisions and ultimately increase the adaptive capacity of the highway system.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 35

4 Integrating Vulnerability into Decision Making
Once transportation vulnerabilities are identified, a logical next step is to consider how to address them.
Integrating results of the vulnerability assessment into decision making is important to ensure that study
results are used in practice. While the information developed from the vulnerability assessment should
be used to satisfy the study objectives, the results may also be useful in ways not initially anticipated.
This section includes strategies to effectively incorporate vulnerability assessment findings into practice.
While we include several in practice examples in this section, the FHWA’s initial round of vulnerability
assessment pilot projects was for the most part limited to the vulnerability assessment itself. The
FHWA will sponsor a second round of pilots with a goal of helping further the State of the practice in
applying vulnerability assessment results into decision making.

4.1

Identifying, Analyzing and Prioritizing Adaptation Options

Transportation agencies may choose to focus their efforts on those assets identified in the vulnerability
assessment as having high likelihood of climate impact and high consequence. For these assets, detailed
analysis of the costs and benefits of adaptation strategies could be conducted. Strategies might include
engineering new assets to withstand environmental conditions anticipated in the future (e.g.,
construction materials better suited to higher heat days), retrofitting existing assets (e.g., adding
barriers to prevent water incursion into tunnels), more intensive maintenance schedules (e.g., more
frequent cleaning of drains), systems planning (e.g., siting new facilities outside of expanded flood
plains), and improved operations plans for weather emergencies. Adaptation strategies should be
evaluated based on cost savings from avoided impacts as well as implementation costs. Strategies
should also be evaluated based on their feasibility, efficacy, ability to withstand a range of climate
hazards, and co-benefits.
Not many agencies have conducted these analyses to date. As such, the FHWA anticipates making this
section of the framework more robust based on experience with the second round of pilots.

4.2

Incorporating Vulnerability Assessment Results into Transportation
Programs and Processes

Incorporating vulnerability assessment results into existing and updated processes can be an effective
mechanism to implement lessons learned quickly and comprehensively. Use of the vulnerability
assessment results in this way can be seen as improving existing analysis and practice, rather than as a
separate and distinct activity. Considering climate change as one of many risks to be considered in
transportation decision-making rather than as a separate issue lowers barriers to adaptation. Agencies
may be able to incorporate climate change vulnerability assessment results into:
o
o
o
o
o

asset management;
emergency and risk management;
hazard mitigation plans;
transportation planning project selection criteria; or
environmental review.

The asset management process is a natural fit for incorporating climate change and extreme weather
vulnerability information. In many cases, existing infrastructure may not be up to handling climate
change and extreme weather events. Consideration of resilience, replacement, and restoration of assets
Page 36

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
can be integrated into asset management programs. Work on a vulnerability assessment can serve as a
launch point to begin looking at a State’s asset management system from the standpoint of climate
resilience.
State DOTs and MPOs have a strong interest in integrating climate change adaptation, hazard mitigation,
and transportation planning into a holistic planning process. In many communities, hazard mitigation
occurs separately from local planning processes, including transportation planning. This practice can
sometimes result in land use and transportation planning that inadvertently encourages development in
hazardous areas.
4.2.1

Examples from Practice: Incorporating Results into Transportation Programs and
Processes

•

The WSDOT incorporated results of their vulnerability assessment into their Guidance for
Project-Level Greenhouse Gas and Climate Evaluations (March, 2012). The guidance calls for
project teams to review the vulnerability assessment results as a first step to answering the
question “How will my project be affected by climate change?” The WSDOT maps developed as
part of the assessment summarize the assessment results, and can be used by project teams to
identify potential vulnerabilities in their project area. The WSDOT has published several
Environmental Impact Statements and NEPA Environmental Assessments containing information
about the relationship of the proposed project to a changing climate.

•

The Virginia Pilot developed a tool for incorporating vulnerability and risk assessment results
into the transportation planning process. The decision support tool helps to prioritize projects
in a transportation plan based on how they would address various issues, including climate
change vulnerability.

•

The Boston MPO incorporated climate vulnerability information into their transportation
planning process. To help identify areas where transportation infrastructure may be vulnerable to
natural hazards and to inform the security evaluation of proposed transportation projects, the MPO
undertook a hazard mapping project. They created an interactive Web tool that maps the
transportation network, natural flood zones, bridge condition, emergency routes, and
emergency support facilities. The tool links to the MPO’s database of Transportation
Improvement Program (TIP) projects and can be used to determine whether proposed projects
are located in areas exposed to flooding, storm surge, or sea-level rise. During project
evaluations, the MPO asks, “Will the project enable the facility to function in extreme weather
conditions?” and “Does it improve a facility that provides redundancy in a vulnerable area?”
www.bostonmpo.org/hazards

•

The Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (LACMTA) recently added
climate adaptation considerations into its construction contracts. Under the environmental
provisions section of the contract, LACMTA specifies that the contractor must consider
projected climate impacts in the design and construction of the project and refers contractors to
the 2011 Federal Transit Administration (FTA) research report, “Flooded Bus Barns and Buckled
Rails: Public Transportation and Climate Change Adaptation,” for more information. LACMTA is
currently undertaking an FTA-funded project to integrate climate change information and
adaptation into the agency’s robust environmental management system (EMS).

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 37

•

The Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA), the public transportation provider
for Atlanta, is incorporating climate impacts into its asset management system, including the
software system used for analyzing data on asset condition and prioritizing capital investments.
The public transportation providers for Philadelphia and Chicago (SEPTA and CTA) are similarly
marrying climate adaptation efforts with federally-funded asset management efforts.

•

Chittenden County MPO in Vermont is currently working with a Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) grant to integrate climate change adaptation, hazard mitigation, and
transportation into a single planning document.

•

The Maryland State Highway Administration (MDSHA) uses its asset management system as a
climate adaptation tool. The agency collects data related to climate change and extreme
weather vulnerability in its Transportation Asset Management Program (TAMP) to better
analyze priority assets. These data include age, elevation, materials used, design lifetime and
stage of life, FEMA flood maps, current and historical performance and conditions, vegetation,
soil type, average daily traffic, bridge scour criticality, and length and width of bridges. [1] The
MDSHA has mapped and identified roads, bridges, and culverts vulnerable to sea level rise. In
addition, using 2011 road closure coordinates from CHART (Coordinated Highways Action
Response Team), the MDSHA plotted a GIS map labeled by category for the type of road closure
such as high water, debris, winter precipitation, or other type of incident. The analysis proved
useful for the agency’s vulnerability assessment as well as during emergency operations. For
instance, during Hurricane Sandy in October 2012, the State emergency management agency
used the 2011 road closure data layer in a geographic data mapping system called Osprey to
combine many other data layers and identify potential hazards. The Osprey system used
historical data on traffic and road closures collected by SHA to help improve storm response. [2]

•

The San Francisco pilot selected two vulnerable assets to test a methodology for analyzing
adaptation options. Using the information in the risk profiles developed by the project, the
team held a work session to evaluate strategies based on equity, economy, ecology, and
governance. The team notes that this was an initial, qualitative assessment that will need
further investigation to determine the real cost-effectiveness, applicability, and viability of
proposed adaptation measures.
One of the assets evaluated was the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge touchdown and toll plaza
on the Oakland side. The asset is protected by a combination of engineered shoreline
protection and wetlands. Even so, the shoreline protection would be overtopped under the mid
and late century sea level rise plus 100-year storm scenarios. This would inundate the bridge
touchdown and toll plaza as well as other transportation assets in the area (Interstate 80, West
Grand Avenue, Mandela Parkway, Burma Road, 7th Street Highway and Railroad Pumps, and
Union Pacific Martinez subdivision).

[1]

Slater, Gregory I., “Climate Change Adaptation: Maryland State Highway Administration,” Presentation to U.S.
Department of Transportation, March 30, 2011.

[2]

Eugene Mulero and Julia Pyper, “As states scramble to adapt, DOT pledges $13M in first of many likely cash infusions,”
Greenwire, October 21, 2012.

Page 38

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
For asset-specific adaptation measures for midcentury, the team considered improved drainage,
retrofit, and raised road surface. Improved drainage around the freeway and toll plaza would
mean that when inundation occurs, there might be only partial closure of the roadway and,
after a storm/high tide event, water would drain off the road surface quickly enough to
minimize disruption. Retrofitting to better withstand temporary inundation would include
placing wiring and electronics for the toll plaza above the flood elevation and waterproofing
buildings and toll booths. Raising the road surface in areas identified as particularly vulnerable
could be done as part of regularly scheduled maintenance. For end-of-century, more expensive
measures may warrant consideration such as elevating the entire freeway above the end-ofcentury 100-year storm level. This might also provide benefits to the region because the raised
road could serve as a levee protecting West Oakland.
The team also considered regional adaptation measures for midcentury—creating a berm,
supporting wetland growth, and constructing a floodwall. For end-of-century the team
considered constructing levees, raising a floodwall built at midcentury, and building new
wetlands (It is unlikely that wetlands will be able to keep pace with sea level rise at the end of
the century).
4.2.2

Resources for Incorporating Results into Transportation Programs and Processes

FHWA Adaptation Peer Exchanges Final Report, FHWA, August 2012. This report synthesizes key
themes and lessons from a series of three FHWA-sponsored peer exchanges on climate change
adaptation, including examples of effective implementation practices presented by the MPO and State
DOT participants.
Flooded Bus Barns and Buckled Rails: Public Transportation and Climate Change Adaptation, FTA,
2011. This comprehensive FTA report on climate change adaptation for public transit includes a chapter
on implementation of climate change adaptation strategies at transportation agencies. There is also a
case study on Transport for London’s experience with asset management.
Eligibility of Activities to Adapt To Climate Change and Extreme Weather Events Under the Federal-Aid
and Federal Lands Highway Program, FHWA, 2012. This memo clarifies that Federal-aid and Federal
Lands highway funding may be used for climate change adaptation work. The memo notes that creating
a more resilient transportation system is a priority for the FHWA and provides some examples of eligible
uses of Federal-aid and Federal Lands highway funds to consider the potential impacts of climate change
and extreme weather events and apply adaptation strategies.

4.3

Stakeholder Engagement and Communication

It is difficult to overstate the importance of public stakeholder engagement in vulnerability assessment
and adaptation planning. If the target audience does not buy into the vulnerability assessment, it may
not support the resulting adaptation actions. The appropriate method of engaging stakeholders will vary
according to the agency, context, and objectives. It is very important to plan for a specific target
audience, and agencies often engage different groups of stakeholders in stages.
Successful engagement of internal staff requires listening and incorporating their feedback and
perspective. If these staff members are engaged and feel that they can take ownership over the
strategy, they may be more willing to provide valuable leadership and insight.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 39

Communicating the need for climate change adaptation is challenging for several reasons. First, people
often assume that “climate change” issues refer exclusively to mitigation. Organizations and
government agencies often house climate change adaptation efforts within traditional environmental
programs, even though adaptation impacts multiple programs, including asset management, risk
mitigation, operations, and planning. Second, the term climate change has become politicized, inhibiting
public agency communication and action in those jurisdictions where political forces do not wish to
address the issue. Lastly, it is difficult to communicate the range of uncertainty associated with climate
projections. For example, agencies are often concerned about releasing detailed inundation maps,
which might alarm and alienate coastal property owners because it is difficult to describe the specific
assumptions and uncertainties associated with these maps. Almost any adaptation assessment effort
will show increased vulnerability to flooding for coastal properties, but acknowledging potential
additional flooding vulnerability decreases the economic value of the property.
4.3.1

Strategies for Effective Communication

The 2010 pilots and participants in the FHWA sponsored peer exchanges have identified several
strategies for effectively communicating climate change vulnerability:
•

•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Page 40

In order to avoid confusing the issue of climate change adaptation with the politics of climate
change mitigation, some agencies use the terms “extreme events,” “event management,” “allhazard management,” and “resilience” as effective terms for communicating impacts and
adaptation issues.
Another strategy for communicating the need for adaptation is to expand conceptions of
sustainability and asset preservation to include resilience. Agencies can emphasize that climate
change adaptation is simple, good business practice that should be integrated throughout the
agency.
Frame adaptation as better planning and responsible risk management.
Frame adaptation as saving money. Stress that preventing impacts is almost always cheaper
than cleaning up and rebuilding after an extreme weather event.
Use past events, such as a memorable flood or heat wave, to help communicate the meaning of
climate projections.
Highlight possible solutions to climate impacts. Frame the issue as one of rising to the
challenge.
Use graphics.
Tailor the message to your audience.
Talk in the here and now. Explain how the climate is already changing in the geographic area the
audience is concerned with and the impact on assets and services that the audience values.
(Many individuals are not aware that climate change impacts are already occurring.)

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

5

Next Steps

Creating a more resilient transportation system is a priority for the FHWA and is consistent with a recent
U.S. DOT policy statement on climate change adaptation. 14 Analyzing and incorporating potential future
climate change impacts to transportation systems is a relatively new and evolving area of practice. One
of the FHWA’s goals is to ensure that State DOTs, MPOs, and local partners have the capacity to address
this relatively new area in their transportation plans and programs. A way that the FHWA is working
toward this is by developing and sharing information on tools and methodologies, such as those
highlighted in this document, that State DOTs and MPOs can use to assess climate change vulnerability
and risk, and to prioritize actions.
The FHWA plans to sponsor a new round of pilot projects in late 2012 through early 2014 to help fill in
gaps in this framework and to assist MPOs and State DOTs to advance climate change adaptation
activities more quickly. The FHWA anticipates that the selected pilots will fall into two distinct groups:
1) A continuation of vulnerability assessments similar to the first set of pilots only focused on concerns
specific to the interior portions of the country.
2) Advancement beyond the initial vulnerability assessment stage to development and implementation
of adaptation options.
Information on the new round of pilots, along with other FHWA research activities will be available on
the FHWA’s Climate Change Adaptation website.

14

US DOT, Policy Statement on Climate Change Adaptation, June 2011. The Policy statement noted DOT’s
intention to integrate consideration of adaptation into its planning, operations, policies, and programs, and also
described some of the guiding principles. See: http://www.dot.gov/docs/climatepolicystatement.pdf

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 41

Appendix A:
Vulnerability Assessment Summaries
The WSDOT Study
The Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) assessed the infrastructure it owns,
including roads, rail, ferry facilities, and airports. The WSDOT held workshops around the State,
presenting information on climate projections and asking maintenance engineers and other
employees with intimate familiarity with the assets, "What keeps you up at night?" to help identify
current vulnerabilities that may be exacerbated in the future.
Washington State Department of Transportation, Climate Impacts Vulnerability Assessment, November
2011.
The New Jersey Study
The New Jersey project was led by the North Jersey Transportation Planning Authority and was
supported by an interagency partnership, including the three New Jersey MPOs, the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, New Jersey Transit, the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, and the New Jersey State Climatologist. The pilot closely followed the three steps of
the Conceptual Risk Assessment Model in its analysis of the New Jersey Turnpike/I-95 corridor and
the New Jersey Coast.
New Jersey Transportation Planning Authority, Climate Change Vulnerability and Risk Assessment
of New Jersey’s Transportation Infrastructure, April 2012.
The OahuMPO Study
The Oahu Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) used an interagency, multidisciplinary 2-day
workshop to facilitate a climate change dialog and identify five key vulnerable assets for further
study. The five assets were then assessed in more detail by transportation experts in three full-day
work sessions.
Oahu Metropolitan Planning Organization, Transportation Asset Climate Change Risk Assessment,
November 2011.
The Virginia Study
The University of Virginia developed a priority setting tool to assess how consideration of climate
change and other factors may affect project prioritization in a transportation plan. The State used
the Hampton Roads region as a case study.
University of Virginia and Virginia Department of Transportation, Assessing Vulnerability and Risk of
Climate Change Effects on Transportation Infrastructure, Hampton Roads, VA Pilot, November
2011.
The San Francisco Study
The Metropolitan Transportation Commission, in partnership with the San Francisco Bay
Conservation and Development Commission, the California Department of Transportation District
4, and others, led a study of a portion of the Bay, stretching from the San Francisco-Oakland Bay
Bridge to the San Mateo Bridge (Alameda County). This study was focused on sea level rise. The
project team developed profiles of risk to sea level rise for a list of representative and unique
assets within the study area, including exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity.

Page 42

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework
Metropolitan Transportation Commission, Caltrans, Bay Conservation and Development
Commission, Adapting to Rising Tides: Transportation Vulnerability and Risk Assessment Pilot
Project: Briefing Book, November 2011.
The Gulf Coast Study
To better understand potential climate change impacts on transportation infrastructure and
identify adaptation strategies, the US DOT is conducting a comprehensive, multi-phase study of
climate change impacts in the Central Gulf Coast region. This region is home to a complex
multimodal network of transportation infrastructure and several large population centers, and it
plays a critical national economic role in the import and export of oil and gas, agricultural products,
and other goods. The study is sponsored by the US DOT's Center for Climate Change and
Environmental Forecasting in partnership with the USGS and is managed by the FHWA.
Gulf Coast Phase 1
Phase 1 (completed in 2008) examined the impacts of climate change on transportation
infrastructure at a regional scale, investigating risks and impacts on coastal ports, road, air,
rail, and public transit systems in the central Gulf Coast, with a study area stretching from
Houston/Galveston, Texas, to Mobile, Alabama. The study assessed likely changes in
temperature and precipitation patterns, sea-level rise, and increasing severity and
frequency of tropical storms. Phase 1 then explored how these changes could impact
transportation systems.
Gulf Coast Phase 2
Phase 2 focuses on the Mobile, Alabama, region -- with the goal of enhancing regional
decisionmakers' ability to understand potential impacts on specific critical components of
infrastructure and to evaluate adaptation options. In Mobile, the U.S. DOT is assessing the
vulnerability of the most critical transportation assets to climate change impacts. The U.S.
DOT will then develop risk management tools to help transportation system planners,
owners, and operators determine which systems and assets to protect and how to do so.
The methods and tools developed under Phase 2 are intended to be replicable to other
regions throughout the country. Phase 2 is scheduled to be completed in 2013.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 43

Appendix B:
Climate Effects and Impacts
Table B1: Impacts of temperature on highway operations and infrastructure.
Source: FHWA (2010)
Climate Effects

Extreme Rutting. Source: www.asphaltwa.com

Increases in very hot days and heat
waves (higher high temperatures,
increased duration of heat waves)

Page 44

Impacts on Infrastructure and Operations
• Increased thermal expansion of bridge joints and
paved surfaces, causing possible degradation.
• Concerns regarding pavement integrity, traffic
related rutting and migration of liquid asphalt,
greater need for maintenance of roads and
pavement.
• Limits on periods of construction activity, and more
night time work.
• Vehicle overheating and tire degradation.
• Maintenance and construction costs for roads and
bridges are likely to increase as temperatures
increase.
• Stress on bridge integrity due to temperature
expansion of concrete joints, steel, asphalt,
protective cladding, coats and sealants.
• Asphalt degradation, resulting in possible short
term loss of public access or increased congestion
of sections of road and highway during repair and
replacement .

Decreases in very cold days

• Regional changes in snow and ice removal costs
and environmental impacts from salt and chemical
use.
• Fewer cold-related restrictions for maintenance
workers.

Later onset of seasonal freeze and
earlier onset of seasonal thaw

• Changes in seasonal weight restrictions.
• Changes in seasonal fuel requirements.
• Improved mobility and safety associated with a
reduction in winter weather.
• Longer construction season in colder areas.
• Freeze-thaw conditions increasing frost heaves and
potholes restricting loads on roads.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

Table B2: Impacts of precipitation on highway operations and infrastructure.
Source: FHWA(2010)
Climate Effects

NJ 287 collapse from Hurricane Irene.
Source: NJ DOT

Increases in intense
precipitation events

Impacts on Infrastructure and Operations
• Increases in weather-related delays and traffic
disruptions.
• Increased flooding of evacuation routes.
• Increases in flooding of roadways and tunnels.
• Increases in road washout, landslides and mudslides
that damage roadways.
• Drainage systems likely to be overloaded more
frequently and severely, causing backups and street
flooding.
• Areas where flooding is already common will face
more frequent and severe problems.
• If soil moisture levels become too high, structural
integrity of roads, bridges, and tunnels (especially
where they are already under stress) could be
compromised.
• Standing water will have adverse effects on road
base.
• Increased peak streamflow could affect the sizing
requirement for bridges and culverts.

• Increased susceptibility to wildfires, causing road
closures due to fire threat or reduced visibility.
• Increased risk of mudslides in areas deforested by
wildfires.
Trestle fire in eastern Washington
Source: Image from Washington State Department
of Transportation, Climate Impacts Vulnerability
Assessment, November 2011.

Increases in
drought conditions

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 45

Slope Failure. SR 12. Source WSDOT

Changes in seasonal precipitation
and river flow patterns

• Benefits for safety and reduced interruptions if
frozen precipitation shifts to rainfall.
• Increased risk of floods, landslides, slow failures and
damage to roads if precipitation changes from snow
to rain in winter and spring thaws.
• Increased variation in wet/dry spells and decrease in
available moisture may cause road foundations to
degrade.
• Degradation, failure and replacement of road
structures due to increases in ground and
foundation movement, shrinkage and changes in
groundwater.
• Increased maintenance and replacement costs of
road infrastructure.
• Short term loss of public access or increased
congestion to sections of road and highway.

Table B3: Impacts of storm intensity on highway operations and infrastructure.
Source: FHWA(2010)
Climate Effects

Hurricane Damage from Wave Action to
Highway 90 in Bay St Louis, MS
Source: Illinoisphoto.com

Impacts on Infrastructure and Operations
• More frequent and potentially more extensive
emergency evacuations.
• More debris on roads, interrupting travel and
shipping.
• Bridges, signs, overhead cables and other tall
structures are at risk from increased wind speeds.
• Increased threat to stability of bridge decks.
• Decreased expected life-time of highways
exposed to storm surge.
• Risk of immediate flooding, damage caused by
force of water and secondary damage caused by
collisions with debris.
• Erosion of coastal highways and land supporting
coastal infrastructure.
• Damage to signs, lighting fixtures, and supports
• Reduced drainage rate of low-lying land after
rainfall and flooding events.

Increases in storm intensity
(leading to higher storm surges,
stronger winds, flooding)

Page 46

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

Table B4: Impacts of sea level rise on operations and highway infrastructure.
Source: FHWA(2010)
Climate Effects

Three breaches in NC12 after Hurricane Irene Photo
Credit: Tom MacKenzie, US FWS

Rising sea levels (leading to higher
storm surge, increased salinity of
rivers and estuaries, flooding)

Impacts on Infrastructure and Operations
• Amplifies effect of storm surge, causing more
frequent interruptions to coastal and low-lying
roadway travel due to storm surges.
• Amplifies effect of storm surge, causing more
severe storm surges requiring evacuation.
• Permanent inundation of roads or low lying feeder
roads in coastal areas. Reduces route
options/redundancy.
• More frequent or severe flooding of underground
tunnels and low-lying infrastructure.
• As the sea level rises, the coastline will change and
highways that were not previously at risk to storm
surge and wave damage may be exposed in the
future.
• Erosion of road base and bridge supports.
• Highway embankments at risk of
subsidence/heave.
• Bridge scour.
• Reduced clearance under bridges.
• Increased maintenance and replacement costs of
tunnel infrastructure.

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 47

Glossary
Excerpted from Impacts of Climate Variability and Change on Transportation Systems and
Infrastructure—Gulf Coast Study, US Department of Transportation, (2008) (GC1), and Adapting to the
Impacts of Climate Change, America’s Climate Choices: Panel on Adapting to the Impacts of Climate
Change, National Research Council, (2010). (ACC)
Adaptation
Adjustment in natural or human systems to a new or changing environment that exploits beneficial
opportunities or moderates negative effects. (ACC)
Adaptive Capacity
The ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including climate variability and extremes) to
moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the consequences.
(GC1)
Exposure
The combination of stress associated with climate-related change (sea level rise, changes in
temperature, frequency of severe storms) and the probability, or likelihood, that this stress
will affect transportation infrastructure. (GC1)
Extreme Weather Event
An event that is rare within its statistical reference distribution at a particular place. Definitions
of “rare” vary, but an extreme weather event would normally be as rare as or rarer
than the 10th or 90th percentile. By definition, the characteristics of what is called “extreme
weather” may vary from place to place. Extreme weather events may typically include
floods and droughts. (GC1)
Resilience
A capability to anticipate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from significant multi-hazard threats
with minimum damage to social well-being, the economy, and the environment. (ACC)
Risk
A combination of the magnitude of potential consequence(s) of climate change impacts(s) and the
likelihodd that the consequence(s) will occur. (ACC)
Vulnerability
The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate
change, including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the character,
magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity, and its adaptive
capacity. (ACC)

Page 48

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

References
California Department of Transportation, Guidance on Incorporating Sea Level Rise, 2011.
Eugene Mulero and Julia Pyper, “As states scramble to adapt, DOT pledges $13M in first of many likely
cash infusions,” Greenwire, October 21, 2012.
Federal Highway Administration, Adaptation Peer Exchanges Final Report, August 2012.
Federal Highway Administration, Assessing Criticality in Transportation Planning, 2011.
Federal Highway Administration, “Eligibility of Activities to Adapt To Climate Change and Extreme
Weather Events under the Federal-Aid and Federal Lands Highway Program,” 2012.
Federal Highway Administration, Regional Climate Change Effects: Useful Information for Transportation
Agencies, 2010.
Federal Transit Administration, Flooded Bus Barns and Buckled Rails: Public Transportation and Climate
Change Adaptation, 2011.
Metropolitan Transportation Commission, California Department of Transportation, Bay Conservation
and Development Commission, Adapting to Rising Tides: Transportation Vulnerability and Risk
Assessment Pilot Project: Briefing Book, November 2011.
National Academy of Sciences, Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change, 2010
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Coastal Services Center. Coastal Inundation Mapping
Guidebook. Charleston, South Carolina, 2009
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Technical Considerations for Use of Geospatial Data
in Sea Level Change Mapping and Assessment, 2010.
New Jersey Transportation Planning Authority, Climate Change Vulnerability and Risk Assessment of
New Jersey’s Transportation Infrastructure, April 2012.
Oahu Metropolitan Planning Organization, Transportation Asset Climate Change Risk Assessment,
November 2011.
Slater, Gregory I., “Climate Change Adaptation: Maryland State Highway Administration,” Presentation
to U.S. Department of Transportation, March 30, 2011.
Thomas et al., “Effects of Climate Change on the National Flood Insurance Program in the United States
– Riverine Flooding.” Watershed Management 2010, ASCE, 2011.
U.S. Climate Change Science Program, Coastal Sensitivity to Sea-Level Rise: A Focus on the Mid-Atlantic
Region, 2009 http://www.climatescience.gov/Library/sap/sap4-1/final-report/

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 49

U.S. Department of Transportation, Policy Statement on Climate Change Adaptation, June 2011.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Impacts of Climate Change and Variability on Transportation
Systems and Infrastructure: Gulf Coast Study, 2008.
U.S. Global Change Research Program, Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States, June 2009.
University of Virginia and Virginia Department of Transportation, Assessing Vulnerability and Risk of
Climate Change Effects on Transportation Infrastructure, Hampton Roads, VA Pilot, November 2011.
Washington State Department of Transportation, Climate Impacts Vulnerability Assessment, November
2011.
Washington State Department of Transportation, Guidance for Project-Level Greenhouse Gas and
Climate Evaluations, March 2012.

Page 50

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Draft FHWA Climate Change and Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment Framework

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

Page 51

FHWA Publication No : FHWA-HEP-13-005

Page 52

Climate Change & Extreme Weather Vulnerability Assessment

