FAQ: Emergency Relief Program and Resilience
Q: Can FHWA emergency relief program funds be used to rebuild a damaged highway in a
manner that can prevent damage from future extreme weather events?
A: Yes, if consistent with current standards or if it would save the FHWA emergency relief
program money over time. (FHWA ER Program Manual p24)
Consistent with current standards
Repaired facilities may be rebuilt to current geometric
and construction standards, without being considered
a betterment. For example, a repaired length of
roadway may have an improved waterway opening
that results from following current standards. As
another example, a State may be using more current
precipitation data from NOAA Atlas 14 rather than an
older data set that may have been used when the
facility was originally designed. Also, some states now
require incorporating information on future conditions
into transportation planning and project development
processes. For instance, Caltrans requires considering
sea level rise in planning of coastal transportation
facilities.

Example from Colorado: Improve resilience by bringing up
to current standards.

September 2013 flooding in Colorado washed out this stretch of
US 36 between Lyons and Estes. The segment was reconstructed
to be more resilient to future floods by shifting the road a few
feet further from the river onto bedrock, and using grouted
riprap and native vegetation to stabilize the riverbank. The work
was eligible for and funded with FHWA Emergency Relief funds.
It brought the road up to current geometric design standards
calling for 6 foot shoulders (pre-flood there were minimal
shoulders). Colorado DOT worked in close partnership with the
Central Federal Lands Highway Division and the FHWA Colorado
Division Office on this project. Photo Credit: CO DOT

Save the FHWA emergency relief program money
over time
In general, FHWA emergency relief funds are provided
to restore a facility to its pre-disaster condition.
However, in some circumstances, restoring the facility
to its pre-disaster condition would leave it vulnerable
to repeat damage, costing the FHWA emergency relief
program more than if the facility had been rebuilt with
protective features. In fact, transportation law
requires States to consider alternatives for facilities
repeatedly requiring repair with FHWA emergency relief funds. 1

Adding protective features is considered economically justified under the FHWA emergency relief program if:
Cost of protective feature < probability of damage within facility lifetime * cost of damage that would be
incurred by FHWA emergency relief program.
Note that for the economic justification, only costs to the FHWA emergency relief program are included. Other costs,
such as cost of traveler delay or reduced economic activity are not included. The State must submit an economic
analysis to the FHWA Division office and the Division office must approve it in order for the protective feature to be
eligible for FHWA emergency relief funds.

1

Sec. 1315(b) of Pub. L. 112–141 (MAP-21) as implemented in 23 CFR 667

Examples of betterments that have been approved include:
o raising roadway grades,
o relocating roadways,
o stabilizing slide areas and slopes,
o installing riprap,
o lengthening or raising bridges to increase waterway openings,
o deepening channels,
o increasing the size or number of drainage structures,
o replacing culverts with bridges,
o providing scour countermeasures at bridges, and
o adding spur dikes.
Example from Texas: Economic justification for betterment to improve resilience.

SH 91 at Shawnee Creek, June 2015.

Photo Credit: TxDOT

Replacement structure under construction.
Photo Credit: TxDOT

In 2015, water cresting over the Denison Dam spillway washed away the existing pipe culvert and roadway surface of SH 91 at
Shawnee Creek. The culvert has been overtopped multiple times during its lifespan. It was previously washed out during flooding
in 1990 and repaired at a cost of $882,000. After the 2015 flooding, Texas DOT conducted life cycle economic analysis of two
alternatives – 1) replace in kind; and 2) replace with a bridge.
Alternative 1 entails installing a 80 ft long, 5 – 12 ft diameter barrel Corrugated Metal Pipe (CMP) culvert spaced 4 ft apart.
Alternative 2 entails a 305 ft concrete span-bridge to accommodate the historic extreme event (6/1/15) of 90,000 cfs. It also entails
raised approach ways to the bridge, heavier columns with tie beams, extensive riprap around the abutments for scour protection,
shear key design to secure the superstructure to the substructure during overtopping, and rail that will allow water to pass through.
Alternative 1 (replace in kind) would cost $1.0 million, but likely require replacement approximately every 25 years over the 100
year lifespan. Alternative 2 would cost $1.7 million, but would likely last the full 100 year lifespan, with $152,000 rehabilitation at
the 60 year point. The analysis used standard discount and inflation rates to calculate present costs. It found that Alternative 2
would have lower cost over the lifespan.
Based on the analysis, the Texas FHWA Division certified the betterment as economically justified and the cost was covered by the
Emergency Relief program. In addition to saving money in reconstruction costs, Alternative 2 also saves $5.9 million in road user
delay costs over time.

Example from North Carolina: NC 12

What if it would not save the FHWA emergency relief program
money over time but the State would still like to include additional
protective features?
Even if rebuilding the facility would not save the FHWA emergency
relief program money over time, a State may still decide to rebuild
more resiliently using other funds because it may be cost beneficial
from a broader perspective. For instance, adding protective
features might prevent disruption to travel and economic activity
that carry benefits not included in the more narrow analysis of cost
savings to the FHWA emergency relief program alone. States may
use their regularly apportioned Federal-aid funds for the
incremental cost to protect the asset where the betterment cannot
be justified with FHWA emergency relief funds.
Proactive approach carries benefits
Rather than waiting for a disaster to damage a facility, a proactive
approach protects the traveling public, prevents damage, and saves
money. While the FHWA emergency relief program does not
provide funding for a proactive approach, other FHWA programs do.
For instance, planning and research funds can be used to conduct a
vulnerability assessment and analysis of adaptation options. Regular
FHWA program funds can be used for activities to plan, design, and
construct highways to adapt to current and future climates and
extreme weather events (see memo).

Hurricane Irene in 2012 breached this section of
Pea Island on the Outer Banks of North Carolina,
washing out a segment of NC 12. The breach is in
an area known as the “S-Curves” which have a
history of ER eligible damages. This area has been
repaired eight times since 1998. Replacing the
segment in kind was not practical given the
severity of the breach. The most practical solution
was to build a bridge. A bridge would be
consistent with Section 404 permit requirements.
Without a bridge, frequent beach nourishment
would be required. NCDOT decided to address the
long term issues of this area through a longer
bridge than required to just bridge the breach. A
longer bridge allows for future migration of the
breach as well as shore line erosion. The portion
of the project that would have been needed to
bridge the existing breach was funded by ER: 0.71
miles of the 2.11 mile project (34% of project is ER
eligible). The rest of the project was eligible for
other federal and state funding. Photo Credit: Tom
MacKenzie, US FWS.

A proactive approach involves the following steps:
1. Conduct a vulnerability assessment. Using FHWA’s
Vulnerability Assessment Framework, determine which
assets are most vulnerable and prioritize action.
2. Integrate into transportation system planning. Incorporate
the results of the vulnerability assessment into the long range transportation plan such that decisions on siting
new transportation facilities and allocating funds to rehabilitate or protect assets take into account relative
climate risks in addition to other community needs and considerations. For instance, in Tampa, FL the
Hillsborough MPO included climate resilience analysis in their transportation plan, identifying adaptation actions
that would cost $31 million, but avoid $265 million in losses.
3. Incorporate into engineering design processes. When designing new highways or rehabilitating older assets,
evaluate future climate impacts on the structures and consider design changes as appropriate. FHWA resources
include the 11-step process for transportation facility adaptation assessments, Hydraulic Engineering Circular 25,
Vol. 2: Highways in the Coastal Environment: Assessing Extreme Events, and HEC-17: Highways in the Riverine
Environment.
4. Incorporate into asset management. Incorporate information on vulnerability into asset management in order
to include adaptive action in regular maintenance and in rehabilitation of assets. NCHRP25-25(94): Integrating
extreme Weather into Transportation Asset Management Plans provides helpful information.
Over the past several years, FHWA has partnered with many DOTs and MPOs to respond proactively by assessing
vulnerabilities and analyzing adaptation options (see pilots).

Relevant Policy and Guidance
“The FHWA supports planning, designing
• FHWA Order 5520 - states that it is FHWA policy to integrate
and constructing highways to adapt to
consideration of climate and extreme weather risks into its
current and future climate and extreme
weather events under the Federal-aid
planning, operations, policies and programs.
program. Features that will improve the
• Memo: Eligibility of Activities to Adapt - clarifies that FHWA
resilience of repaired federal aid highways
funds can be used for adaptation to changes in climate.
should be considered and evaluated
• 23 CFR 667 - requires States to consider alternatives for
consistent with risk, cost effectiveness and
facilities repeatedly requiring repair with FHWA emergency
regulatory conditions. The evaluation should
relief funds.
apply the best available scientific and
economic information to forecast and
• Emergency Relief Manual – provides guidance on use of
assess future risk factors.” – FHWA
FHWA emergency relief funds, including explaining that
Emergency Relief Manual
emergency relief funds may be used to rebuild damaged
facilities to be more resilient to future climate impacts if consistent with current design or if it would save the
FHWA emergency relief program money over time.
• FHWA Order 5182.1 – provides procedures for administration of the emergency relief program.
• 23 CFR 515 - requires climate and extreme weather risks in risk-based asset management plans.
For more information:
FHWA Emergency Relief Program Website
FHWA Resilience Website
Contacts:
• Greg Wolf, FHWA Office of Infrastructure, greg.wolf@dot.gov, 202-366-4655
• Tina Hodges, FHWA Office of Planning and Environment, tina.hodges@dot.gov, 202-366-4287

