EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
EXECUTIVE ORDER N-2-25
WHEREAS on January 7, 2025, I proclaimed a State of Emergency to exist in
Los Angeles and Ventura Counties due to the Palisades Fire and windstorm
conditions; and
WHEREAS the Palisades Fire has burned over 15,000 acres and additional
fires have ignited and spread rapidly in Los Angeles County as a result of those
windstorm conditions, including the Eaton, Hurst, Lidia, and Woodley Fires; and
WHEREAS these Los Angeles County fires and windstorm conditions
continue to threaten structures, homes, and critical infrastructure, with over
170,000 residents under evacuation orders in Los Angeles County; and
WHEREAS these Los Angeles County fires and windstorm conditions have
resulted in poor air quality and significant impacts to schools, including school
closures and limited outdoor physical education; and
WHEREAS under the provisions of Government Code section 8571, I find
that strict compliance with various statutes and regulations specified in this
Order would prevent, hinder, or delay the mitigation of the effects of these Los
Angeles County fires and windstorm conditions.
NOW, THEREFORE, I, GAVIN NEWSOM, Governor of the State of California,
in accordance with the authority vested in me by the State Constitution and
statutes, including the California Emergency Services Act, and in particular,
Government Code section 8567, 8571, and 8627, do hereby issue the following
Order to become effective immediately.
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT:
1. The provisions of Unemployment Insurance Code section 1253
imposing a one-week waiting period for unemployment insurance
applicants are suspended as to all applicants who are unemployed as
a direct result of this emergency in Los Angeles County and apply for
unemployment insurance benefits during the time period beginning
January 7, 2025, and ending on the close of business on July 7, 2025, in
Los Angeles County and who are otherwise eligible for unemployment
insurance benefits.
2. Vehicle Code sections 9265(a), 9867, 14901, 14902, and 15255.2,
requiring the imposition of fees, are suspended with regard to any
request for replacement of an identification card, driver's license card,
vehicle registration certificate, or certificate of title, or registration
stickers, by any individual who loses such records as a result this
emergency in Los Angeles County. Such records shall be replaced
without charge.
3. The provisions of Vehicle Code sections 4602 and 5902, requiring the
timely registration or transfer of title, are suspended with regard to any
registration or transfer of title by any individual who is unable to comply
with those requirements as a result of this emergency in Los Angeles
County. The time covered by this suspension shall not be included in
calculating any late penalty pursuant to Vehicle Code section 9554. 
4. Health and Safety Code sections 103525.5 and 103625, and Penal
Code section 14251, requiring the imposition of fees, are suspended
with regard to any request for copies of certificates of birth, death,
marriage, and dissolution of marriage records, by any individual who
loses such records as a result of this emergency in Los Angeles County.
Such copies shall be provided without charge.
5. State statutes, rules, regulations, and requirements that fall within the
jurisdiction of boards, departments, and offices within the California
Environmental Protection Agency and the California Natural Resources
Agency are hereby suspended to the extent necessary for expediting
the removal and cleanup of debris from this emergency or to address
other impacts associated with that debris, for implementing any
restoration plan necessary for mitigation of the effects of the
emergency, or conducting other fire recovery activities.
6. Individuals or entities who desire to conduct activities under the
suspension of statutes, rules, regulations, and requirements specified in
Paragraph 5 shall first request that the appropriate Agency Secretary,
or the Secretary's designee, make a determination that the proposed
activities are eligible to be conducted under the suspension. The
Secretary of the California Environmental Protection Agency and the
Secretary of the California Natural Resources Agency shall use sound
discretion in applying this Order to ensure that the suspension serves
the purpose of accelerating cleanup and recovery, while at the same
time protecting public health and the environment. Each Agency shall
maintain on its website a list of all suspensions approved under this
Paragraph.
7. Any activities performed under the suspension of statutes, rules,
regulations, and requirements specified in Paragraph 5 shall be in
accordance with the State Environmental Protection Plan, or a
comparable plan describing how such actions will balance
expeditious fire recovery and environmental protection.
8. In order to ensure hospitals, clinics, and other health facilities remain
open, the Director of the California Department of Public Health
(CDPH) may waive any of the licensing requirements of chapters 1, 2,
8, and 8.5 of division 2 of the Health and Safety Code and
accompanying regulations with respect to any hospital, clinic, other
health facility, home health agency, or hospice agency identified in
Health and Safety Code sections 1200, 1250, 1727, or 1746 that is
impacted by this emergency. Any waiver shall include alternative
measures that, under the circumstances, will allow the facilities to
remain open while protecting public health and safety. Any health
facilities or agencies being granted a waiver shall be established and
operated in accordance with their disaster and mass casualty plan or
emergency preparedness plan. Any waivers granted pursuant to this
paragraph shall be posted on the CDPH website and shall be in effect
only so long as necessary to address the direct impacts of this
emergency in Los Angeles County.
9. In order to directly respond to the needs of impacted adult and senior
care facilities, child care facilities, children’s residential facilities,
resource family homes, home care organizations, and other similar
care facilities and care providers within the California Department of
Social Services’ (CDSS) jurisdiction, the Director of CDSS may waive any
provisions of the Family Code, Health and Safety Code, or Welfare and 
Institutions Code, and accompanying regulations or written directives,
with respect to the use, licensing, certification, registration or approval
of care providers, facilities or homes within CDSS jurisdiction set forth in
the California Community Care Facilities Act (Health and Safety Code
section 1500 et seq.), Child Care Provider Registration (Health and
Safety Code section 1596.60 et seq.), the California Child Day Care
Facilities Act (Health and Safety Code section 1596.70 et seq.),
Residential Care Facilities for Persons With Chronic Life-Threatening
Illness (Health and Safety Code section 1568.01 et seq.), the California
Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly Act (Health and Safety Code
section 1569 et seq.), Medical Foster Homes for Veterans (Health and
Safety Code section 1568.21 et seq.), Continuing Care Contracts
(Health and Safety Code section 1770 et seq.), the Home Care
Services Consumer Protection Act (Health and Safety Code section
1796.10 et seq.), and the Resource Family Approval Program (Welfare
and Institutions Code section 16519.5 et seq.). Any waivers granted
pursuant to this paragraph shall be posted on the CDSS website and
shall be in effect only so long as necessary to address the direct
impacts of this emergency in Los Angeles County.
10.In order to directly respond to the needs of behavioral health programs
and facilities impacted by this emergency, including alcohol and other
drug programs, adult alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment
facilities, driving-under-the-influence programs, narcotic treatment
programs, psychiatric health facilities, mental health rehabilitation
centers, social rehabilitation programs, skilled nursing facilities with
special treatment programs, Lanterman-Petris-Short designated
facilities, community treatment facilities, short term residential
therapeutic programs, and children’s crisis residential programs, the
Director of the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) may waive
any licensing, certification, or approval requirements for such programs
under its jurisdiction set forth in Welfare and Institutions Code, Divisions
4, 5 and 9 and in Health and Safety Code, Divisions 2 and 10.5 and
accompanying regulations, written standards, or information notices.
Any waivers granted pursuant to this paragraph shall be posted on the
DHCS website and shall be in effect only so long as necessary to
address the direct impacts of this emergency in Los Angeles County.
11. The requirements to provide minimum instructional minutes in physical
education for grades 1 through 12 as provided by Education Code
sections 51210, 51220, 51222, and 51223 are suspended during periods
affected by this emergency in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties with
respect to school buildings or temporary facilities in which indoor
space for physical education is unavailable. To the extent that students
displaced by these wildfires significantly impact local educational
agencies in other counties, these sections and all implementation
regulations are also suspended for impacted local educational
agencies.
I FURTHER DIRECT that as soon as hereafter possible, this Order be filed in
the Office of the Secretary of State and that widespread publicity and notice
be given of this Order.
This Order is not intended to, and does not, create any rights or benefits,
substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the State of
California, its agencies, departments, entities, officers, employees, or any other
person.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have
 hereunto set my hand and caused
 the Great Seal of the State of
 California to be affixed this 8th day
 of January 2025.
_________________________
GAVIN NEWSOM
Governor of California
ATTEST:
_____________________________
SHIRLEY WEBER, PH.D
Secretary of State