EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
PROCLAMATION OF A STATE OF EMERGENCY
WHEREAS on January 7, 2025, the Palisades Fire ignited in Los Angeles
County, burning over 1,200 acres as of the time this Proclamation is issued; and
WHEREAS high winds, low humidity, and dry conditions have increased the
intensity and spread of the Palisades Fire, causing imminent threat to life with
Red Flag warnings in effect in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties and
widespread dangerous windstorm conditions with damaging wind gusts of 50 to
80 mph forecasted; and
WHEREAS the Palisades Fire and windstorm conditions threaten structures,
homes, and critical infrastructure, including power lines and water tanks, and
have prompted evacuation orders and warnings and impacted the access
route to the Palisades Highlands community; and
WHEREAS in response to a request from the Governor’s Office of
Emergency Services, the Federal Emergency Management Agency approved a
Fire Management Assistant Grant to assist with the mitigation, management,
and control of the Palisades Fire on January 7, 2025; and
WHEREAS under the provisions of Government Code section 8558(b), I find
that conditions of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property exist due
to impacts of the Palisades Fire and windstorm conditions in Los Angeles and
Ventura Counties; and
WHEREAS under the provisions of Government Code section 8558(b), I find
that the conditions caused by the Palisades Fire and windstorm conditions, by
reason of their magnitude, are beyond the control of the services, personnel,
equipment, and facilities of any single local government and require the
combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to appropriately respond;
and
WHEREAS under the provisions of Government Code section 8625(c), I find
that local authorities are inadequate to cope with the magnitude of the
damage caused by the Palisades Fire and windstorm conditions; and
WHEREAS under the provisions of Government Code section 8571, I find
that strict compliance with various statutes and regulations specified in this
Proclamation would prevent, hinder, or delay the mitigation of the effects of the
Palisades Fire and windstorm conditions.
NOW, THEREFORE, I, GAVIN NEWSOM, Governor of the State of California,
in accordance with the authority vested in me by the State Constitution and
statutes, including the California Emergency Services Act, and in particular,
Government Code section 8625, HEREBY PROCLAIM A STATE OF EMERGENCY to
exist in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties due to the Palisades Fire and
windstorm conditions.
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT: 
1. All agencies of the state government utilize and employ state
personnel, equipment, and facilities for the performance of any and all
activities consistent with the direction of the Office of Emergency
Services and the State Emergency Plan. Also, all residents are to obey
the direction of emergency officials with regard to this emergency in
order to protect their safety.
2. The Office of Emergency Services shall provide assistance to local
governments, if appropriate, under the authority of the California
Disaster Assistance Act, Government Code section 8680 et seq., and
California Code of Regulations, Title 19, section 2900 et seq.
3. As necessary to assist local governments and for the protection of
public health and the environment, state agencies shall enter into
contracts to arrange for the procurement of materials, goods, and
services necessary to quickly assist with the response to and recovery
from the impacts of this emergency. Applicable provisions of the
Government Code and the Public Contract Code, including but not
limited to travel, advertising, and competitive bidding requirements,
are suspended to the extent necessary to address the effects of this
emergency.
4. The California National Guard may be mobilized under Military and
Veterans Code section 146 to support disaster response and relief
efforts, as directed by the Office of Emergency Services, and to
coordinate with all relevant state agencies and state and local
emergency responders and law enforcement within the impacted
areas. Sections 147 and 188 of the Military and Veterans Code are
applicable during the period of participation in this mission, exempting
the California Military Department from applicable procurement rules
for specified emergency purchases, and those rules are hereby
suspended.
5. Adequate state staffing during this emergency is necessary for all state
agencies and departments with an assigned response and/or recovery
role. Consistent with applicable federal law, work hour limitations for
retired annuitants, permanent and intermittent personnel, and state
management and senior supervisors, are suspended. Furthermore,
reinstatement and work hour limitations in Government Code sections
21220, 21224(a), and 7522.56(b), (d), (f), and (g), and the time
limitations in Government Code section 19888.1 and California Code
of Regulations, title 2, sections 300-303 are suspended. All other
restrictions must be adhered to for retired annuitants. The Director of
the California Department of Human Resources must be notified of any
individual employed in state government pursuant to these
suspensions. The suspension of statutes identified in this Paragraph shall
also apply to local governments, as applicable, to ensure adequate
staffing to appropriately respond to this emergency in Los Angeles and
Ventura Counties. Local governmental agencies shall notify the
California Public Employees' Retirement System of any individual
employed by an agency pursuant to this Paragraph.
6. The limitation for the period of employment for State Personnel Board
emergency appointments, as provided in Government Code section
19888.1, is suspended for positions required for emergency response
and/or recovery operations related to this emergency in Los Angeles
and Ventura Counties. The requirements and period of employment for
such appointments will be determined by the Office of Emergency
Services, but shall not extend beyond the termination date of the State
of Emergency.
I FURTHER DIRECT that as soon as hereafter possible, this Proclamation be
filed in the Office of the Secretary of State and that widespread publicity and
notice be given of this Proclamation.
This Proclamation is not intended to, and does not, create any rights or
benefits, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the
State of California, its agencies, departments, entities, officers, employees, or
any other person.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have
hereunto set my hand and caused
the Great Seal of the State of
California to be affixed this 7th day
of January 2025.
_________________________
GAVIN NEWSOM
Governor of California
ATTEST:
_____________________________
SHIRLEY WEBER, PH.D.
Secretary of State