A blueprint for youth inclusion in climate diplomacy
Over the course of my career, I have had the extraordinary opportunity of interacting with young people from all corners of the world, engaging with their perspectives on everything from climate leadership to education and diplomacy.
In particular, my encounters with Japanese students have always prompted me to reflect on how both the United Arab Emirates and Japan have innovation at their core. Our countries are also distinguished by a deep-rooted respect for our elders, accompanied by a continuous desire to uplift our youth and provide them with a better future.

This shared North Star has threaded across the interactions I have had with young people from the UAE to Japan and across Asia — all brought together by a strong sense of urgency and purpose combined with resilience and optimism. For many young climate leaders, building resilience is not a distant goal but a present one. Their motivation, energy and passion are vital to igniting global climate action and integrating new perspectives into tackling this complex challenge.

The voices needed to drive progress convened at COP28 — the United Nations climate change conference held in Dubai last year — including business, civil society, youth and indigenous communities, creating an unprecedented forum for open dialogue. Inclusivity was at the heart of a transformational course correction achieved by changing the way we talk about cocreating climate resilience.

As we look to COP29 — which kicked off in Baku, Azerbaijan, on Monday and runs until Nov. 22 — and beyond, young people must continue to be deeply embedded in international climate diplomacy. The goal is to ensure that their priorities, aspirations and unique perspectives are accounted for as the world meets again to accelerate climate action.

Youth climate champions
The establishment of the Youth Climate Champion (YCC) at COP28 was emblematic of a shared vision to engage a broad range of voices to deliver inclusive outcomes while bringing much-needed attention, ambition and action to the places most in need.

Building on the foundations of the COP27 youth envoy — a position established at the U.N. climate conference in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, in 2022 — the YCC is designed to amplify the voices of youth-led and youth-focused organizations within global climate diplomacy, facilitating meaningful inclusion and representation and ensuring world leaders understand the unique challenges that young people face.

As we look to COP29, the YCC must continue to serve as a conduit between the conference’s presidency and youth stakeholders. Most importantly, the YCC’s work extends beyond U.N. climate negotiations, happening at the local, regional and global levels during major events, from Asia-Pacific Climate Week to Climate Week NYC, which takes place in conjunction with the U.N. General Assembly.

These platforms are vital to ensuring that the perspectives of young people across communities on the front lines of climate change, including Japan, are brought to the forefront of global conversations. They also boost capacity-building opportunities for young leaders, as well as allowing them to explore mechanisms to fund innovations that tackle climate challenges.

Global perspectives and diversity
The complex challenges of climate change vary widely across different ecosystems. Many young people are already tackling them in their respective communities, leveraging the power of technology to explore new ways of building resilience. Creating platforms where these climate leaders can convene to exchange best practices is key to accelerating innovation and capacity-building, particularly in fragile communities.

In an effort to expand youth participation from underrepresented groups, the COP28 presidency established the International Youth Climate Delegate Program (IYCDP), selecting over 100 delegates from around the world to contribute to the negotiations process — the largest initiative to expand youth participation in international climate diplomacy to date.

Most notably, the program prioritized delegates from least developed countries, small island developing states, indigenous peoples and other minority groups. From Asia, the IYCDP featured young climate leaders from Thailand, Singapore and Indonesia, among others, working on everything from increasing small businesses’ participation in the green energy transition to strengthening emergency responses to natural disasters.

Programs such as the IYCDP are made possible by local and regional dialogues that empower young climate leaders to share their perspectives and build momentum to accelerate global climate resilience. In the case of Japan, these include the Japan Climate Initiative and its Japan Climate Action Summit, which play a significant role in bringing businesses, civil society and climate leaders to the same table.

Partnerships and dialogues
Before becoming the UAE’s minister of climate change and environment, I had the privilege of spending time at the Ministry of Education, exploring new opportunities to foster global youth education and capacity-building in climate action. Most importantly, I found that true innovation comes from bringing diverse backgrounds together to exchange experiences and knowledge.

Bringing this vision to life requires more bilateral and multilateral pathways that foster deeper, multifaceted cooperation.

It has been incredibly exciting to witness how young people and climate leaders across the UAE and Japan are working together to cocreate a climate resilient future. Earlier this year, I met with former Japanese agriculture minister Tetsushi Sakamoto to discuss how our countries can deepen bilateral cooperation in food security and marine conservation.

While the UAE and Japan are home to very different climates and environments, we are both focused on building long-term resilience through innovation and technology. It has been invigorating to exchange knowledge around everything from precision farming to smart greenhouses and biotechnology.

As we look to COP29 and beyond, multilateral partnerships and global initiatives such as the Agriculture Innovation Mission for Climate, known as AIM for Climate, and the Mangrove Alliance for Climate — both of which Japan and the UAE are key partners to — will be pivotal in crystalizing greater collaboration and empowering youth to continue exploring and innovating.

In many ways, the next generation is already leading the charge in accelerating climate action — we must continue elevating their voices and impact, empowering them to build a more resilient and optimistic future.