An Open Letter to Presidential Candidates on Voting Rights

April 29, 2019

Dear Presidential Candidates:

When Brianna Ross was 19, she was convicted of a felony for stealing diapers for her son. At her sentencing hearing, a judge told Ross that she'd face a lifelong punishment for her mistake: She would never be allowed to vote. Ross said she was made to feel "empty and unimportant" for decades, as she was forced to sit on the sidelines of democracy. But her fortune finally changed in 2016, when Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe restored voting rights to Ross and more than 150,000 formerly incarcerated Virginians. A year later, at age 53, Ross participated in her first election, where she says she finally had the opportunity to say, "I count."

The right to vote is a fundamental component of American citizenship. Yet millions of Americans have been stripped of this right and made to feel like second-class citizens because of laws that exclude people from voting due to a criminal conviction. An estimated 6.1 million Americans with felony convictions were barred from voting in the 2016 presidential election alone, a race that was decided by just 79,316 votes. In short, felony disenfranchisement is not just anti-democratic and bad for public safety, it is an unpopular practice that sprang from the most shameful era of American history, a vestige of our past wildly out of step with international norms. And now is the moment for its abandonment.

Felony disenfranchisement is as senseless as it is cruel. It subverts a person's fundamental right to participate as a full-fledged member of society. We know that returning citizens are far less likely to be re-arrested when we support them in their transitions back home. A large body of research shows that letting formerly incarcerated people vote fosters skills and capacities which are rehabilitative, and is significantly correlated with reducing re-arrest, incarceration, and self-reported criminality. Ensuring that ALL Americans can vote is not just a vital affirmation of our national character, but an important policy to enhance public safety and reduce recidivism.

Americans are finally starting to push back against this injustice. Most Americans now think it's common sense that people with prior felony convictions should be allowed to vote after they've completed their sentences. Last year, a supermajority of Florida voters endorsed a state constitutional amendment to end permanent disenfranchisement for people who have completed their sentences. Other states already allow formerly incarcerated people to regain their right to vote, but they vary in how they restore those rights, and seven more states have introduced bills in 2019 that would abolish felony disenfranchisement.

This growing movement against felony disenfranchisement is a promising endorsement of American values, but it raises a key question: Why disenfranchise people in prison to begin with? Why not let them continue to vote while they are incarcerated?

Throughout Europe, people in prison retain their right to vote while incarcerated. Unlike most American states, these 28 countries have enacted various measures to ensure that incarcerated people remain fully engaged in society. People who are incarcerated in Germany, for example, not only vote, but earn wages on par with the rest of the workforce. They have the right to be incarcerated near their families, and, upon release, have access to a "network of rights meant to promote their integration with and membership in German society." In Europe, mandatory and permanent disenfranchisement is as unusual as it is anti-democratic.

America, too, can honor every citizen's right to vote and still flourish. Maine, Vermont, and Puerto Rico treat the right to vote as a bedrock democratic principle for all citizens, including those in prison. Advocates, people in prison, and even corrections officials say voting allows incarcerated people to maintain a sense of connection to the community and society at large, which in turn helps prepare them for life after prison. Protecting every American's right to vote isn't only popular, it's also endorsed by those with the most intimate knowledge of our criminal legal system.

This practice was born in our Jim Crow past, and its modern persistence echoes historical pain. Felony disenfranchisement laws gained popularity in the post-Reconstruction era: shortly after black men gained the right to vote, disenfranchisement laws were codified to systematically strip away black votes. States where African Americans made up a greater portion of the prison population were significantly more likely to adopt felony disenfranchisement. As these laws spread, states began creating lists of crimes they believed were most likely to impact black voters. Felony disenfranchisement became a tool to limit the political power of black communities and individuals to elect representatives to advocate for their interests.

Even today, communities of color are disenfranchised at much higher rates than white voters. In the 2016 election, 7.4 percent of all African American adults were disenfranchised as a result of a felony conviction, a rate four times higher than the rest of the population. In Kentucky, a full quarter of the black electorate cannot vote today due to felony disenfranchisement. Latinx communities are also disenfranchised at rates greater than the general population. These racial disparities turn whole communities into second-class citizens, undermining faith in the fairness of our government, our elected officials, and the notion that all people are treated equally under the law.

We need a President who will stand up for the right of all Americans to vote. We thus ask each of you to publicly commit to ending felony disenfranchisement and to call for the restoration of voting rights for all citizens, regardless of their criminal history.

If you have any questions or would like to discuss this further, please contact Amani Sawari, National Right 2 Vote Campaign, at amanisawari@gmail.com.

Sincerely,

Charles Douglas Owens, II


HARLAN RICHARDS

April 5, 2019

National Gerrymandering

Statistical analysis has found that Republicans won 16 more House of Representative seats in 2018 because of gerrymandered districts than they would have if there had been competitive elections. Gerrymandering is the process of redrawing legislative districts to favor one political party over another. Since 2010, technology has been available which allows districts to be drawn so precisely that the party in power can guarantee it will never lose another election.

In North Carolina, 9 out of 12 House seats went to Republicans yet in the election they won only 51% of the vote. There has been an ongoing Republican advantage in Florida, Michigan, Wisconsin and South Dakota due to gerrymandering. In 2018, Republicans kept majorities in Iowa, Michigan, Pennsylvania, North Carolina and Wisconsin even though Democratic candidates received more votes. In the Wisconsin legislature, more than 60% of the assembly districts are set up so that there is a Republican majority which guarantees a Republican will win every election.

Every 10 years redistricting occurs. After the 2020 census, the districts will be redrawn. I don't know about the other states, but Wisconsin now has a Democratic governor (gerrymandering cannot affect statewide elections which is why Democrats won every statewide elected position in 2018) so the next drawing of legislative districts will have to be fairly and impartially done. It may have to be done by a federal judge but at least it will put an end to the last 10 years of minority Republicans controlling our state government.

We need a non-partisan redistricting process which levels the playing field for everyone - something the Republicans oppose because it will result in them losing control now and for the forseeable future.

Governor Evers has proposed changing the redistricting process to a non-partisan system in his current budget but Republican legislative leaders have already declared that to be a nonstarter.

My Letter to America
Journal #8

Damn…don’t you know America? Men and women are dying. Not all but just a select demographic who’ve been marginalized to poverty, prisons and penal structures. They put people from these places in prisons because they’ve decided to no longer suffer from the many societal pains that derive from the environments they’ve come from. So, the question surfaces, what can be done about a system designed to augment margins and repress people who are doing all they can to go outside those margins?

America, we’re tired of your sneak hatred, we’re tired of your racism and the continuation of investing into institutions that perpetuate different modes of slavery. In prison, the lowest tier of civilization within America, is left outside of rule of law and persons within these places are snuffed out from the world, left to suffer in isolation. The system of communication that’s so widely used in society is nonexistent within the confines of your various “departments of correction.” Others don’t know about said horrors which exist until they’ve been arrested and thrust into the shock of being thrown into a society within a society. These places really do no good for your long term health because they tend to erode the chastity of liberty which begins to leave a filthy stench of hypocrisy.

I ask, why does premeditated murder exists, why does crack and heroine still so often make appearances in my community, why is unemployment always concentrated in the places I’ve grown up and was raised in? Why are laws manufactured and tailored to antagonized me and my pool of friends? You act dumb sometimes and as if you don’t know why you behave the way you do at times. DO you think or do you just act, because when I act without thinking you oppressively incarcerated and do all you can to break my spirit and keep me tunnel visioned to the immediate wrong at hand opposed to the larger wrong that you’ve perpetuated, and caused me to forced my hand.

Don’t get me wrong, I’ve not scribed a sob letter to this because we’ve been called to ACT and act is what we will do. We will no longer allow you to force your oppressive hands upon us. I’ve suited up — along with the millions of others to address and do away with your abuse. Eyes at times have grown weary, but yet we’re wide awake and strategizing. What? You ask me who I denote when I profess, “We’re.” We’re, being we are, is the people who are fed up with your B.S. and have resolved to suffer no more. We see that you derive excitement from our suffering, while you live in every bit of accordance to your dream. Well listen, our dream comes directly from a place of longing in which we will die in order to bring into fruition. Don’t stay up though, because while you’re sleep go fighting your sleep — we’re wide awake and moving about in rhythmic waves of action to fight your system!

Your champion & student,
Derrick Washington

Chase the Carrot

What do you get when you cross a broken system with a broken individual? Answer: The D.O.C.

This does not include administration only, but also prisoners, staff, and everyone in the system. No body is excluded. This system is broken, has been, and will continue to be. The problem is, too many people with bad ideas are running the show, on the backs of the people they say they are rehabilitating? Bull-shit! You are exploiting them. You are exploiting us.

These people say they are helping keep society safe. From who? I think I understand your game. You take incarcerated “adults” give them life sentences, or similar to one, and keep your foot on their necks as long as you work for the D.O.C. See, these people like to play head games with us. It is the easiest way to keep a person broken. Act like you are building them up, but in a suttle way shame and humiliate them. This will keep them from actually believing they could achieve the success you offer. You offer an education, but don’t want people to practice what they learn. You want us to expose our traumas, but don’t want us to heal from them. Chase the carrot!!! If you know our traumas and how we came to prison, or why we chose these lives and the poor decisions that led us this way? Then you can help us heal right? Oh, my fault, you only use it to throw back into peoples faces. See the D.O.C. uses its employees to continue the cycle of abuse. Only they do it psychologically.

Pick any 20 prisoners, men and women. Ask them their story. I’m willing to bet everyone has some real traumatic story in their lives. I don’t think anyone woke up one day and chose a date on a calendar to go to prison or commit their crime. Most stories start from a fucked-up childhood. Take the kid that goes to prison at 18 for murdering his live-in girlfriends 4 month old son. How easy is it to forget him in the system ’cause you know he will die in prison? He should die right? At least he should never leave prison, right? Who cares if he saw his mother thrown from a building, who cares if his step-father beat him and locked him in a closet while he pimped his mother out. At 18 he should have had a strong grip of life. Every young man who is raped until the age of 12 should know how to discuss his emotions by the age of 18. This kid was too busy pissing his bed of fear from his grandfather who beat him every day till he finally, found his mother at 11.  How selfish of him.

What happens when this kid becomes a father at 16? He does what he knows best, what he was taught. Run! It is too easy. Especially when you are now running with your mum.  You ran so much you’d think Nike came out with a crack-pipe. Yeah, this 18 year old kid had every opportunity.

So at 40, after recognizing how good he had it in life, when an officer verbally abuses him, and puts his hand in his face, he should take it as a privilege. Don’t tell anyone, wait, where have I heard this before? You can abuse me, but it is our secret. Yeah it sounds very familiar, but I’m the safe bet, use what you were taught. Go ahead, be confident, assert yourself in a calm non-violent way. Practice humility. The D.O.C. will do right by you. They will remove you from a job you love, they will remove you from your private cell, they will humiliate you and rape you again. They want people to become better citizens with no actual reality of becoming a real citizen again. They can use the skills of this same person to raise $20,000 N.E.A.D.S. dogs for free, while the N.E.A.D.S. program rakes in the cash. But don’t talk about that, we don’t share our dirty laundry with people outside of the house. Especially when the head official endorses the hustle. I wonder how many officials own a $1,000 – $3,000 failed dog?

That is a good trade to keep the workers pickin cotton, I mean training dogs. Do not dare expose it! ‘Cause your 20+ years of good behavior could vanish, parole could banish. Lose that false dignity you were made to believe was ok to nurture. I see the inner child, I’m just not allowed to listen to his voice. It is a scary situation when a case-worker tells you she is going to do what she wants, and the powers that be will believe her. So why open your mouth. Live in silence, ’cause that 18 year old kid, never had a voice, he was fucked from birth. And the D.O.C. officials are there to do the “masters” job and never, ever, let me forget it.

By Hector M. Santiago

Murmurs…
In school I could hear the murmur of voices
reading, laughing. They seeped into the hallway
under the gap beneath the door.
There were portraits of important people,
important white men
up on the wall in the entryway
under a slightly tattered American flag.
They looked like the ghosts of order.
We knew they’d be there watching,
making sure we didn’t
step too far out of line.
Now, the entryways have metal detectors,
giant rectangular gates.
Instead of a “hello,”
Students are greeted with an
“I don’t trust you.”
In school I could smell
ink and paint,
those hopeful chemicals
that spill words and dreams
into the world.
Now you smell
fear.

By Erin Moore