Through the Door of No Return
The door is a place, real, imaginary and imagined. As islands and dark continents
are. It is a place which exists or existed. The door out of which Africans
were captured, loaded onto ships heading for the New World. It was the
door of a million exits multiplied. It is a door many of us wish never existed.
—Dionne Brand, A Map to the Door of No Return: Notes to Belonging
In early August 1785, English social reformer Jeremy Bentham set out from
Brighton, England, destined for Krich.v, Russia. It was in Russia where
Bentham would first conceive of the Panopticon in a series of letters “from
Crecheff in White Russia, to a friend in England.” At one point during his
journey, in an attempt to reach Constantinople, he embarked from Smyrna
on a cramped Turkish ca.que with “24 passengers on the deck, all Turks;
besides 18 young Negresses (slaves) under the hatches.”1 Much of Bentham’s
writings that addressed slavery were written before this voyage. In
those texts he touches on such topics as sugar production, punishment,
and abolition. Writing during the 1770s on “afflictive capital punishment,”
that being when the degree of pain imposed upon the body surpasses that
necessary to produce death, Bentham details the severe methods of torture
and punishment reserved for “negro slaves” of the European colonies in
the West Indies for the crime of rebellion, a crime so named, he writes, “because they are the weakest, but which, if they were the strongest would
be called an act of self-defense.”
2 While acknowledging Europe’s desire for
“sugar and coffee” and other crops produced through enslaved labor in
the colonies, he suggests that when these goods are obtained by keeping
people enslaved “in a state in which they cannot be kept but by the terror
of such execution: are there any considerations of luxury or enjoyment that
can counterbalance such evils?”3 On the terror of the codes that governed
slave life in the West Indies, Bentham has this to say: “let the colonist reflect
upon this: if such a code be necessary the colonies are a disgrace and
an outrage on humanity; if not necessary, these laws are a disgrace to the
colonists themselves.”4 Bentham arrived in Krichëv in February 1786. One
can only wonder if he thought of the terror of “capital punishment” and of
the slave’s “self-defense”
when he came across those eighteen “young Negresses”
held captive in the hatches of that cramped Turkish caïque.
That somewhere along a journey that ends in The Panopticon; or, The Inspection
House Jeremy Bentham traveled with “18 young Negresses (slaves)”
guides me to question the ways that the captive black female body asks
us to conceptualize the links between race, gender, slavery, and surveillance.
In other words, how must we grapple with the Panopticon, with the
knowledge that somewhere within the history of its formation are eighteen
“young Negresses” held “under the hatches”? If Bentham’s Panopticon depended
on an exercise of power where the inspector sees everything while
remaining unseen, how might the view from “under the hatches” be another
site from which to conceptualize the operation of power? This chapter
asks that we rethink the Panopticon (1786) through the plan of the slave
ship Brooks (1789), as a way to link surveillance studies to black feminist
scholarship.
The first section of this chapter offers an overview of the Panopticon, disciplinary
power, and sovereign power. In the second section I discuss some
of the ways that the Panopticon and panopticism have been put to use in
theorizing surveillance, and in particular three analytical concepts derived
from this model of social control: synopticon, banopticon, and postpanopticism.
In the third section I discuss the plan of the slave ship. Following
this, I examine surveillance technologies of slavery, such as advertisements
for runaway slaves and the census, as well as a set of rules from the 1800s
for the management of slaves on an East Texas plantation. I do this in order
to understand how racializing surveillance functioned through these technologies.
I end this chapter by looking to black feminist theorizing of sur-veillance, including bell hooks on “talking back” (1989) and “black looks”
(1992) and Patricia Hill Collins’s concept of “controlling images” (2000)
as a way to situate surveillance as both a discursive and a material practice.
I also look to artist Robin Rhode’s Pan’s Opticon (2008) and artist Adrian
Piper’s video installation What It’s Like, What It Is #3 (1991), as these creative
texts offer ways to understand black looks and talking back as oppositional
practices that challenge the stereotyped representations of controlling images
and their material effects. My use of Rhode’s Pan’s Opticon and Piper’s
What It’s Like, What It Is #3 is a way of drawing on black creative practices in
order to articulate a critique of the surveillance of blackness. In this fashion,
these works open up a way to think creatively about what happens if we
center the conditions of blackness when we theorize surveillance.
Seeing without Being Seen: The Plan of the Panopticon
The Panopticon was conceived by Jeremy Bentham in 1786 and then
amended and produced diagrammatically in 1791 with the assistance of English
architect Willey Reveley. Bentham first came upon the idea through
his brother Samuel, an engineer and naval architect who had envisioned
the Panopticon as a model for workforce supervision. Pan, in Greek mythology,
is the god of shepherds and flocks, the name derived from paien,
meaning “pasture” and hinting at the root word of “pastoral,” and in this
way the prefix pan- gestures to pastoral power. Pastoral power is a power
that is individualizing, beneficent, and “essentially exercised over a multiplicity
in movement.”5 Bentham imagined the Panopticon to be, as the name
suggests, all- seeing and also polyvalent, meaning it could be put to use in
any establishment where persons were to be kept under watch: prisons,
schools, poorhouses, factories, hospitals, lazarettos, or quarantine stations.
Or, as he wrote, “No matter how different, or even opposite the purpose:
whether it be that of punishing the incorrigible, guarding the insane, reforming
the vicious, confining the suspected, employing the idle, maintaining the helpless,
curing the sick, instructing the willing in any branch of industry, or training the
rising race in the path of education.”6 Of course, “the willing,” “the idle,” and
the so-called rising race might be more able to leave this enclosure at will or
by choice than “the suspected” or “the incorrigible.” With this “seeing machine,”
the unverified few could watch the many and “the more constantly
the persons to be inspected are under the eyes of the persons who should inspect them, the more perfectly will the purpose of the establishment have
been attained.”7 This is control by design, where population management
and the transmission of knowledge about the subject could, as Bentham
explains, be achieved, “all by a simple idea of Architecture!”8
The Panopticon’s floor plan is this: a circular building where the prisoners
would occupy cells situated along its circumference (figure 1.1). With the
inspector’s lodge, or tower, at the center, his field of view is unobstructed:
at the back of each cell, a window, and in its front a type of iron grating
thin enough that it would enable the inspector to observe the goings-on
in the prisoner cells. The cells in the Panopticon make use of “protracted
partitions”—where the partitions extend beyond the iron grating that covers
the front of the cell—so that communication between inmates is minimized,
and making for “lateral invisibility.”9 In this enclosed institution the
watched are separated from the watchers; the inspector’s presence is unverifiable;
and there is said to be no privacy for those that are subject to
this architecture of control. Security in the Panopticon, as Bentham asserts,
is achieved by way of small lamps, lit after dark and located outside each
window of the inspection tower, that worked to “extend to the night the
security of the day” through the use of reflectors.10 By employing mirrors in
this fashion, a blinding light was used as a means of preventing the prisoner
from knowing whether or not the inspection tower was occupied. Power,
in the Panopticon, is exercised by a “play of light,” as Michel Foucault put it,
and by “glance from center to periphery.”11 The inspection tower is
divided into quarters, by partitions formed by two diameters to the
circle, crossing each other at right angles. For these partitions the
thinnest materials might serve; and they might be made removeable
at pleasure; the height, sufficient to prevent the prisoners seeing over
them from cells. Doors to these partitions, if left open at any time,
might produce the thorough light, to prevent this, divide each partition
into two, at any part required, setting down the one- half at such
distance from the other as shall be equal to the aperture of a door.12
With Bentham’s plan for prison architecture, we can see how light, shadows,
mirrors, and walls are all employed in ways that are meant to engender
in many a prisoner a certain self- discipline under the threat of external
observation, as was its intended function. The Panopticon would allow for
a disciplinary exercise of power. Such exercises of power are not ones of
pomp and pageantry, like a queen’s coronation, a state funeral, or a royal wedding, or of the overt kind of spectacular violence that often accompanies
sovereign power. Instead, in this instance, power is covert and achieved
by a play of light.
If an act that is deemed criminal is an assault on the sovereign’s power,
an exercise of sovereign power is that which seeks to make the sovereign’s
surplus power plainly understood by all. It is spectacular and episodic, and
functions “to make everyone aware,” often through ceremonial terror, “of
the unrestrained presence of the sovereign.”13 This is a power exercised
through excessive means and force, like the public execution of Damiens
the regicide, the gruesome scene that opens Foucault’s Discipline and Punish:
The Birth of the Prison (1975). In 1757, Robert- Fran.oise Damiens was
made to make the amende honorable, a symbolic apology for his crime against the sovereign. He was carted through the streets of Paris, France,
holding a burning torch in one hand and his weapon of choice, a knife, in
the other. Boiling resin, sulfur, wax, and oil were combined and poured into
his open wounds, and he was drawn by horses, quartered, and eventually
hacked apart for his attempt on the life of Louis xv, king of France. With
onlookers surrounding, Damiens’s body was burned and his ashes were
“thrown to the winds.”14
Another, but less well- known, public execution took place twenty- three
years before that of Damiens the regicide in Paris. This time it was in the
French colony of Nouvelle- France, and it was a black woman who was subjected
to this gruesome exercise of sovereign power. Marie- Joseph Ang.lique,
a Portuguese- born enslaved black woman, was tried and convicted
of setting a fire that left much of the town of Montr.al in ruins in 1734,
the arson itself ruled to be an affront to that same sovereign that Damiens
the regicide attempted to assassinate, King Louis xv.15 Ang.lique arrived
in Montr.al from New England after being sold to Fran.ois Poulin de
Francheville in 1725. After Francheville’s death in 1733, his wife, Th.r.se de
Couagne, became Ang.lique’s sole mistress, but through escape, insolence,
unruliness, and talking back, Ang.lique was never quite fully under Madame
Francheville’s complete control. Madame Francheville would later
make arrangements to sell Ang.lique for six hundred pounds of gunpowder.
That sale was never fulfilled as, on the evening of April 10, 1734, a fire
broke out on the roof of the Francheville home and Ang.lique was named
the arsonist and arrested the morning after. Claude Thibault, a white indentured
servant from France who was under contract to Madame Francheville,
was named as Ang.lique’s accomplice. Thibault was Ang.lique’s lover.
Ang.lique and Thibault had escaped from Montr.al that previous winter,
but were captured and returned. Days after the fire, Thibault disappeared
and was never arrested. Ang.lique’s trial lasted two months. Under interrogation
she reportedly stated, “No one told me to set the fire. No one helped
me, because I did not do it.”16 Later, under repeated torture, she recanted
that assertion of her innocence—“C’est moi. It’s me and no one else. I want
to die. C’est moi.”17 Condemned to death, she was carted through the streets
of Montr.al, made to make the amende honorable with a burning torch
held in her hand at the door of the town’s parish, and hanged. Ang.lique’s
body hung in the street for all to observe for hours after her execution, was
later burned and her ashes thrown to the winds, as was the ceremony prescribed
for the capital punishment of an arsonist according to French law. 
The ceremony of Ang.lique’s execution, according to Katherine Mc-
Kittrick, achieved at least two things: “spectacular punishment of someone
and something that is said not to exist,” that something being blackness
in and of Canada as absented presence; and “the destroying of bodily evidence.”
19 The trial and hanging of Ang.lique points to the criminalization
of black women’s resistance to captivity. The will of the sovereign was violently
inscribed in Ang.lique’s excruciating and spectacular death (both a
public spectacle and spectacularly elaborate in its excessive violence) and
made known for all who observed it—both free and enslaved—the expendability
of slave life.
Foucault chose to begin “The Body of the Condemned,” the first chapter
of Discipline and Punish, with the brutal public execution of Robert-
Fran.oise Damiens in order to set up, in stark contrast, his discussion of
the discrete and also distributed way that exercises of disciplinary power
operate in the form of rules “for the House of young prisoners in Paris,”
where regulation of the subject happened through observation and also
through routines, repetition, self- discipline, and by following instructions
and timetables. For example, the delinquent’s day would be structured like
this: “Art. 18 Rising. At the first drum roll, the prisoners must rise and dress
in silence, as the supervisor opens the cell doors”; “Art. 20. Work. . . . They
form into work teams and go off to work, which must begin at six in the
summer and seven in the winter”; and “Art. 22. School. At twenty minutes
to eleven, at the drum- roll, the prisoners form into ranks, and proceed in
divisions to the school. The class lasts two hours and consists alternately of
reading, writing, drawing and arithmetic.”20 The rules for the management
of delinquents came eighty years after the execution of Damiens. Foucault
cites both the execution and the rules to say that “they each define a
certain penal style” and mark the decline of punishment as a public spectacle.
21 Disciplinary power did not do away with or supplant the majestic
and often gruesome instantiations of sovereign power, however. Instead, at
times, both formulations of power—sovereign and disciplinary—worked
together. In reading punishment as public spectacle in the Old France and
the New, I chose to recount the hanging of Marie- Joseph Ang.lique here
because her torture and killing evidences blackness and slavery in Canada
pre– Book of Negroes (1783), pre– Underground Railroad escape of black
people from the United States to Canada (early nineteenth century), and
pre- Confederation (1867). Putting the life of Marie- Joseph Ang.lique in
conversation with the death of the regicide Robert- Fran.oise Damiens is my way of interrupting Foucault’s reading of discipline and the birth of
the prison, as doing so points to an alternative archive from which to understand
the hold of both disciplinary and sovereign power on black life
under slavery. While Foucault argued that the decline of the spectacle of
public torture as punishment might have marked “a slackening of the hold
on the body,” this chapter contends that when that body is black, the grip
hardly loosened during slavery and continued post- Emancipation with, for
example, the mob violence of lynching and other acts of racial terrorism.22
Panopticon, Panoptical, Panopticism:
A Critical Reinterpretation
Various surveillance studies theorists have employed the Panopticon as an
analytical tool in order to question how social control operates on certain
bodies and in certain spaces, as well as a way to conceptualize disciplinary
power and the ways that it comes to be internalized by some. Some
theorists of surveillance have used the metaphor of the Panopticon to
generate other ways of conceptualizing surveillance. For example, Thomas
Mathiesen’s synopticon (1997) is a reversal of the panoptic schema where
the many watch the few in a mass- mediated fashion (think here of the
reality television show Big Brother, where a television audience, as well as
an Internet- based one, observe “houseguests” as they compete for prizes by
way of twenty- four- hour continuous camera feeds), or Didier Bigo’s banopticon,
where those whom the state abandons are often banned based on a
racialization of risk. Bigo takes the view that the practice of profiling and
categorizing some into risk categories and then “projecting them by generalization
upon the potential behaviour of each individual pertaining to the
risk category” is the disposition of U.S.-led security measures and practices,
and increasingly so post- 9/11.23 With the banopticon, certain groups and
individuals are labeled as potentially dangerous. This labeling as dangerous
is then massively applied to certain nations and their citizens and to those
outside the bounds of citizenship, where anxieties and the anticipation of
risk stemming from those deemed “dangerous minorities” then shape security
measures at borders, on city streets, and other spaces that come to
be associated with risk, or with being at risk of becoming risky. According
to Bigo, the banopticon is “characterized by the exceptionalism of power
(rules of emergency and their tendency to become permanent), by the way it excludes certain groups in the name of their future potential behaviour
(profiling) and by the way it normalizes the non- excluded through its
production of normative imperatives, the most important of which is free
movement.”24 The banopticon might look like trusted traveler programs
that speed up border crossings for preapproved travelers who provide some
form of biometric- based verification, or free trade zones where goods can
be manufactured, transported, imported, and exported without duties or
other barriers to trade. The banopticon could also take the form of stopand-
frisk policing practices where categories of suspicion could include
“furtive movements,” or “fits a relative description,” or “change direction at
the sight of an officer,” or “inappropriate attire for season.”25
Some scholars have pointed to what they see as an apparent overreliance
on the Panopticon in the field of surveillance studies that leaves the
role of visibility overstated. Others have suggested that the Panopticon is
no longer useful, or that at least as a way of theorizing disciplinary power
in the contemporary moment it cannot offer a complete account of, for
example, surveillance and exercises of power within social media and cell
phone usage, or by way of digital information databases and data aggregators.
On this point, Roy Boyne offers a critique of panopticism in which
he contends that “post- Panoptical subjects reliably watch over themselves”
without need of the physical structure of the Panopticon.26 He suggests
that panopticism has been “transcended by the emergent practice of previsualization”
where simulation, profiling, and prevention occur, rather
than merely observation.27 Also, Boyne names the “reversal of the Panoptical
polarity,” where the many watch the few, as operating in conjunction
with the Panopticon, where the few watch the activities of the many, in this
way echoing Thomas Mathiesen on the synopticon.28 John Gilliom and Torin
Monahan, in their analysis of social media sites such as Facebook, argue
that “rather than being a prisonlike panopticon where trapped people follow
the rules because they’re afraid someone is watching, with Facebook
and similar sites people are probably more afraid that no one is watching,
that no one cares what they’re up to.”29 With this apparent fear of not being
noticed, Gilliom and Monahan say that social media users “discipline
themselves in a different way by divulging as much as possible about their
lives and thoughts.”30 Other theories, like the “social sorting” of people and
populations into categories of risk, are offered as a means of qualifying and
understanding forms of surveillance that are sometimes overlooked. On
the overrepresentation of the panopticon and accounts that take power as unilaterally exercised, Lyon writes that “not only does this kind of account
distract attention from the subtle interplay between surveillance power and
the attitudes and activities of those subject to surveillance, it also places
all the emphasis on forms of rational control.”31 Likewise, Kevin Haggerty
names the Panopticon as “oppressive,” not only because of an overreliance
placed upon it as an explanatory metaphor in works that analyze surveillance,
but also for the way “the panoptic model has become reified, directing
scholarly attention to a select subset of attributes of surveillance,” which
has resulted in the panoptic schema being applied in areas where it is, as he
argues, “ill- suited, and important attributes of surveillance that cannot be
neatly subsumed under the ‘panoptic’ rubric have been neglected.”32 One
area of contention that Haggerty points to is the claim that in the panoptic
schema, who, or what, does the watching is irrespective, or, as Foucault
wrote, “Stones can make people docile and knowable.”33 For Haggerty, it is
a mistake not to take into account the “attitudes, predispositions, biases,
prejudices and personal idiosyncrasies” of those who do the surveillance
for how these factors inform the “form, intensity and regularity” of their
responses.34
The very failure of panopticism to produce docile subjects is an important
point of criticism, where, as Boyne puts it, “that failure is announced
in many places: prison riots, asylum sub- cultures, ego survival in Gulag or
concentration camp.”35 In her observation and interviews at intensive management
units housed within prisons run by the Washington State Department
of Corrections, Lorna Rhodes names aggressive behavior (throwing
feces, urine, and other bodily fluids), passive behavior (such as refusals to
eat), and self- harm as instances in which the body is used as a means of resistance,
and she argues that these acts are expressions of inmates’ struggles
with the panopticon.36 Intensive management units, or special housing
units, are solitary confinement units where certain inmates are segregated
from the general prison population, spending up to twenty- three hours a
day in their individual cells. Prolonged isolation in solitary confinement for
many leads to depression, hallucinations, and acts of self- mutilation.
While the prisoner’s body is “the very ground of the panoptical relation,”
under such conditions, as Rhodes contends, “it is also its potential undoing;
he has within himself the makings of a perverse opacity.”37 Rhodes cites
Lyon here in her naming of this “perverse opacity,” a term that, as Lyon
explains, points to the idea that such “resistance may not be liberatory—indeed, it invites further control—but it calls in question both the panopticon
and our representations of it.”38 Like Rhodes and Lyon, Boyne also
calls the Panopticon into question, but he advises us not to do away with
it completely as a way to understand our contemporary condition. Instead,
he suggests that we “draw a line through the terms Panopticon, Panoptical,
Panopticism. To place these terms under erasure, drawing a black line
through them, allowing the idea to be seen at the same time as denying its
validity as description, could be the most honest resolution.”39
Unarguably the most cited work in surveillance studies on the Panopticon
as a metaphor for disciplinary exercises of power is Foucault’s Discipline
and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, first published in 1974 as Surveiller
et punir: Naissance de la Prison, with the book’s French title alluding
more closely to its focus on surveillance. In Discipline and Punish, Foucault
argues that “discipline makes individuals” and achieves its success by employing
“simple instruments”: hierarchical observation (the greater over
lesser authority, whether through physical structures or choreographed
gazes), normalizing judgment (quantitative measurements, comparisons,
establishment and adherence to set rules and norms, exclusions), and the
examination.40 Broadly, Foucault explains that hierarchical observation and
normalizing judgment combine in the examination. Hierarchical observation
works “as a piece of machinery” designed for “the uninterrupted play
of calculated gazes.”41 With this play of gazes in the disciplinary institution,
such as the penitentiary or the school campus, surveillance “functioned
like a microscope of conduct” and sought to objectify, transform, and improve
individuals through architectural arrangements, registration, examination,
and documentation.42 Foucault describes normalizing judgment
as that which normalizes by singling out and correcting “that which does
not measure up to the rule, that departs from it” with a glance, a gaze that
classifies, ranks, and measures.43 So although disciplinary power is individualizing,
by way of normalizing judgment, individual actions are referred
“to a whole that is at once a field of comparison, a space of differentiation
and the principle of a rule to be followed.”44 The examination places the
individual in a “network of writing” as it is “accompanied at the same time
by a system of intense registration and of documentary accumulation.”45
The examination in the disciplinary institution seeks to objectify and transform
individuals through architectural arrangements, registration, and
documentation. and
eighteenth- century disciplinary institutions that Foucault lays out in
Discipline and Punish, the architectural design, registration, documentation,
and examination at slave trafficking forts and ports, through the Door
of No Return, and on slave ships during the Middle Passage voyage from
Africa to the auction blocks and plantations of the New World were subject
defining, but always violent. The violent regulation of blackness as spectacle
and as disciplinary combined in the racializing surveillance of the
slave system. On this point, Robyn Wiegman states that “the disciplinary
power of race, in short, must be read as implicated in both specular and
panoptic regimes.”46 Here, black children, women, and men were subject
to these “simple” but violent instruments—branding irons fashioned out
of silver wire, ships’ registers in which African lives were recorded as units
of cargo, or listed alongside livestock on slave auction notices, and census
categories, estate records, and plantation inventories that catalogued enslaved
people as merchandise. The branding of enslaved people as a means
of accounting for a particular ship’s cargo, for example, was not only individualizing
but also a “massifying” practice that constituted a new category
of subject, blackness as saleable commodity in the Western Hemisphere.
Plantation rules laid out for overseers the prescribed measures for regulating
plantation life and “social death.”47 In using Foucault’s schemas of sovereign
power, discipline, and normalization, as well as the concept of panopticism,
I am mindful of their limitations for theorizing the role of trauma,
vulnerability, and violence in the making and marking of blackness as property.
However, for the concept of racializing surveillance, Foucault’s contributions
to understanding sovereign power and its “policy of terror” and to
conceptualizing discipline and the imposition of norms, for example, offer
us a way to understand how acts of making the black body legible as property
were put to work in the production of the slave as vendable object to
be bought, sold, and traded.48
Complicating Foucault’s panopticism through the archive of slavery and
black feminist scholarship on surveillance is a way of offering a critical reinterpretation
of the concept—by “drawing a black line” through it. To do
this I now turn to the plan of the slave ship. Drawing a line through panopticism
by way of the slave ship is another means of interrupting Foucault’s
reading of discipline, punishment, and the birth of the prison, because, as
Marcus Rediker put it, the slave ship was “a mobile, seagoing prison at a
time when the modern prison had not yet been established on land.”
“2 feet 7 inches”: The Plan of the Slave Ship
The prison didn’t come to exist where it does just by happenstance. Those who
inhabit it and feed off its existence are historical products.
—George L. Jackson, Soledad Brother
Through its creative remembering of the brutalities of slavery and its afterlife,
Caryl Phillips’s short story “The Cargo Rap” (1989) makes links
between the Panopticon, captivity, the slave ship, plantation slavery, racism,
and the contemporary carceral practices of the U.S. prison system.
Racism is, as Ruth Wilson Gilmore explains, “the state- sanctioned or extralegal
production and exploitation of group- differentiated vulnerability
to premature death.”50 Rudi (or sometimes “Rudy”) Leroy Williams, the
protagonist of “The Cargo Rap,” was sentenced to prison at nineteen years
of age for the attempted theft of forty dollars. Rudi narrates this slow, statesanctioned
death that is the “negative inheritance” of the slave’s progeny
that Stephen Best and Saidiya Hartman alert us to: “the ongoing production
of lives lived in intimate relation to premature death (whether civil,
social or literal).”51
Phillips writes “The Cargo Rap” in epistolary form—as a series of letters
penned by Rudi, namely to family members and to his defense committee,
over the course of eighteen months. In this way, “The Cargo Rap”
follows George L. Jackson’s Blood in My Eye letters, written right before his
death on August 21, 1971, in San Quentin State Prison in California. Like
Rudi, Jackson was convicted and incarcerated for armed robbery, accused
of stealing seventy dollars from a gas station while still a teenager in 1961.
On Jackson’s sentence, Foucault had this to say: “ten years in prison for
70 dollars is a political experience—an experience of hostage, of a concentration
camp, of class warfare, an experience of the colonized.”52 In one of
his letters written in Soledad Prison on June 10, 1970, Jackson states that
for the black man “being born a slave in a captive society and never experiencing
any objective basis for expectation had the effect of preparing me
for the progressively traumatic misfortunes that led so many black men to
the prison gate. I was prepared for prison. It required only minor psychic
adjustments.”53 Both Foucault and Jackson speak of incarceration as a condition
of colonization and of captivity.
In “The Cargo Rap” letters, we witness Rudi make sense of the traumatic
misfortunes of the world outside of his solitary confinement, where such
prolonged isolation makes his life one of constant exposure to fluorescent. 
light and permanent illumination, living in “neither daytime nor nighttime.
It is no time,” as he put it.54 To understand this constant and tortuous
play of light on the body, Rudi asks his reader to “take a desk lamp and
shine it into your face. Try to relax, think, act, concentrate, do everything
in this position for twenty- four hours.”55 In an attempt to cope with the
deliberate disorientation of “no time,” Rudi cultivates an ability to tell time
by way of certain noises and silences, as some silences are “closer to dawn
than others.”56 Rudi tells of isolation, routinization, inspections, premature
death, and the harmful toll of prison life: deteriorating eyesight, The
Wretched of the Earth, a ten- by- four- foot cell, a body atrophied, and the suffering
of brutalities at the hands of the prison guards. This is a type of corporeal
violence that was reported to Lo.c Wacquant in his study of the Los
Angeles County Jail system as “getting the flashlight treatment,” where after
violent beatings at the hands of prison guards one would be able to “read
the brand of their flashlight” on the prisoner’s body.57 During Rudi’s brief
sojourn in the general prison population, he writes: “I can have darkness.
My eyes can rest easy at night.”58 He writes of his desperation to escape the
“high- security barracoon” that holds him and of the travels and works of
the black activists, writers, athletes, and artists that sustain him while living
a slow- motion death in prison: Muhammad Ali, W. E. B. DuBois, Frantz
Fanon, Marcus Garvey, Toussaint L’Ouverture, Paul Robeson, Harriet
Tubman, Phillis Wheatley.
Readers of Phillips’s “The Cargo Rap” are not privy to the responses, if
any, to Rudi’s letters by his family members or his other correspondents.
Instead, we are left only with Rudi’s thoughts. His letters are, he writes,
“a little cargo rap about the children of Africa who arrived in this country
by crossing the water.”59 Rudi’s first letter is to his mother, Alice, a domestic
worker. In it he writes on Darwinism and self- preservation and he relates
how unthinkable it is for her to even imagine trading places with the
wealthy white women who employ her to work in their homes. With each
of his letters, the plantation metaphor becomes even more direct as Rudi’s
physical and mental conditions deteriorate further. Incarceration is a slowmotion
death. Rudi’s last letter is dated August 1968, in a year that saw the
assassinations of both Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy, the
passing of the Fair Housing Act meant to end discrimination in housing
in the United States, riots in over one hundred U.S. cities, student coalitions
occupying buildings on university and college campuses demanding
education reform, and the black- gloved fists raised in protest by Af-rican American track and field medalists John Carlos and Tommie Smith
during their medal ceremony at the Summer Olympic Games in Mexico
City. Rudi’s last letter is addressed to his by-then- deceased mother. In it he
writes, “the plantation is wide and stretches beyond the horizon. . . . We
toil from ‘can’t see’ in the morning to ‘can’t see’ at night. The master is cruel,
but nobody ‘knows’ him better than his slaves. There is strength in this.”60
By now disoriented from doing time under the deliberately disorienting
conditions of “no time,” in this letter Rudi inquires about the crops and tells
of his capture by slavers and his hopes for return to Africa. In this plantation
cum prison, he says, “Thirty feet above me a man sits on a watchtower
with a rifle.”61 This final letter speaks of loss, prison time management, plantation
rules, the Panopticon’s inspection tower, and survival of the Middle
Passage’s cargo hold.
I chose an excerpt from Dionne Brand’s A Map to the Door of No Return
as this chapter’s epigraph to point to a symbolic moment and space of diaspora
and belonging. This door, while located at La Maison des Esclaves
(House of Slaves) museum on Gor.e Island, off the coast of Senegal, stands
as a symbolic memorial of forced migrations that led to the mass vending
of black people across the Atlantic Ocean. On it, Brand writes, “I think that
Blacks in the Diaspora feel captive despite the patent freedom we experience,
despite the fact that we are several hundred years away from the Door
of No Return, despite the fact that the door does not exist.”62 This captive
feeling that Brand describes is one of the vestiges of unfinished emancipations.
A key aim of this chapter is to question how what Bob Marley names
“the Babylon system,” and what Howard Winant situates as “the legacy and
lessons of the Atlantic slave system,”63 can help us to think about how blackness
is often absented from surveillance studies. “Babylon System” is the
fourth track from the album Survival by Bob Marley and the Wailers, which
was released in 1979. In it, Marley sings of refusal, freedom, and rebellion,
with lyrics like, “from the very day we left the shores” and “we’ve been
taken for granted much too long.” On the cover of the album is a schematic
diagram of a slave ship with tiny figures meant to represent its human cargo.
Superimposed on this diagram is the album’s title, Survival. In 1789, the
London Committee of the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave
Trade produced and distributed Description of a Slave Ship (figure 1.2). Unlike
Bentham’s blueprint of the Panopticon, this schematic diagram of a
maritime prison is populated with tiny figures dressed in loincloths to represent
the legally allotted amount of enslaved human cargo that the slave vessel Brooks (often referred to as Brookes) could transport under the Dolben
Act of 1788, an act that regulated slave carrying and overcrowding.
Some background regarding this plan is necessary here.64 The ship
Brooks was built in 1781, commissioned by Liverpool- based slave merchant
Joseph Brooks Jr. It was large as slave vessels go, weighing in at around 320
tons and at one point carrying 609 enslaved captives during a 1787 voyage
from the Gold Coast of Africa to Kingston, Jamaica.65 It took its final
voyage in 1804 to Montevideo, Uruguay, under Captain William Murdock,
where over three hundred people disembarked as slaves after a sixty- two-day voyage from West Africa. Description of a Slave Ship was fashioned by
the London Committee in the hope of making “an instantaneous impression
of horror upon all who saw it.”66 A similar rendering of a slave ship was
produced in December 1788 by the Plymouth Committee of the Society
for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade. Named the Plan of an African
Ship’s lower Deck with Negroes stowed in the Proportion of only One to
a Ton, this earlier version featured an overview of an African ship’s cargo
hold along with text that laid out the Plymouth Committee’s agenda, including
the demand that the “cruelty and inhumanity of this trade must be
universally admitted and lamented,” and advocated for “an end to a practice,
which may, without exaggeration be stiled one of the greatest evils at
this day existing upon the earth.”67 Copies were circulated in and around
Plymouth, with some copies sent to the London Committee. By April 1789
the London Committee had produced their version, which featured seven
different views of the Brooks: a cutaway longitudinal view of the ship, cross
sections of the stern deck and midship, and an overview of the plan of the
lower deck with figures of the enslaved lying in a plank position, crammed
into all available space. In a later version, Stowage of the British Slave Ship
“Brookes” under the Regulated Slave Trade Act of 1788, the note for “Figure 3”
detailed this cramped configuration: “the stowage of 130 additional slaves
round the wings or sides of the lower deck by means of platforms or shelves
(in the manner of galleries in a church) the slaves stowed on the shelves or
below them have only a height of 2 feet 7 inches between the beams and far
less under the beams.”68 Two feet and seven inches. The violence of slavery
crudely reduced to geometric units, with room allotted for forty women,
twenty-four
boys, and sixty men, arranged in a “perfect barbarism,” as abolitionist
Thomas Clarkson described this formation.69 This arrangement
was, as W. E. B. DuBois put it, “a foretaste of hell.”70 Slave trader Theodore
Canot outlined the stowing process:
The second mate and boatswain descend into the hold, whip in hand,
and range the slaves in their regular places: those on the right side of
the vessel facing forward, and lying in each other’s lap, while those on
the left are similarly stowed with their faces towards the stern. In this
way each negro lies on his right side, which is considered preferable
for the action of the heart.71
Without such “strict discipline,” Canot wrote, “every negro would accommodate
himself as if he were a passenger.”72 This spatial arrangement made for a crushing asphyxia: “The men therefore, instead of lying on their backs,
were placed, as is usual, in full ships, on their sides, or on each other. In
which last situation they are not unfrequently found dead in the morning.”
73 The cargo hold is a slow- motion death.74 Some cheek- by- jowl, this
crude arrangement made known that those crossing the Atlantic Ocean
in this manner were not “passengers,” as they were allotted “half the room
afforded soldiers, emigrants or convicts on ships of the same period,” but
were instead to disembark, if alive, as slaves and as unfree.75 Rediker names
the slave ship as “containing a war within,” in which sailors and other crew
would function as prison guards who “battled slaves (prisoners)” when
attempts at insurrection and other types of resistance were made.76 Other
forms of resistance to this shipping arrangement came by way of refusals
to eat, suicides, with some accounts telling of captives rushing all at once
to the leeward end of the vessel “in a gale of wind, on purpose to upset the
ship, choosing rather to drown themselves” than be subject to a life in slavery.
77 They died from “grief, rage and despair,” C. L. R. James remarks in The
Black Jacobins as he describes how some jumped overboard “uttering cries
of triumph as they cleared the vessel and disappeared below the surface.”78
Noted on one popular version of the Brooks diagram is this text:
The “Brookes” after the Regulation Act of 1788, was allowed to carry
454 Slaves, She could stow this number by following the rule adopted
in this plate. Namely of allowing a space of 6 ft. by 1 ft. 4 in. to each
man; 5 ft. 10 in. by 1 ft. 4 in. to each woman, & 5 ft. by 1 ft. 2 in. to
each boy, but so much space as this was seldom allowed even after
the Regulation Act. It was proved by the confession of the Slave Merchant
that before the above Act the Brookes had at one time carried
as many as 609 Slaves. This was done by taking some out of Irons &
locking them spoonwise (to use the technical term) that is by stowing
one within the distended legs of the other.79
With women, men, girls, and boys locked spoonwise and segregated by age
and sex, the production and containment of gendered difference is apparent.
This stowage plan is what Hortense Spillers calls the making of “scaled
inequalities.”80 Such accounting and architectural practices highlight the
scale of the violence and trauma of the Middle Passage, a passage so named
as it formed the middle leg of a triangular journey (the Middle Passage was
bracketed between the journey from Europe to Africa and that from the
New World to Europe). The London Committee version, Description of a Slave Ship, states that the male cargo would be shackled at the ankles, “two
by two; the right leg of one to the left leg of the other, and their hands are
secured in the same manor,”81 while the figures representing women and
children were, in that rendering, unshackled, but in closer proximity to the
captain’s cabin. The London Committee noted, “The principal difference is
in the men. It must be observed, that the men, from whom only insurrections
are to be feared, are kept continually in irons, and must be stowed in
the room allotted for them, which is of a more secure construction of the
rest.”82 The plan then, in its various versions, highlights the gendering of
sexual violence, while diagrammatically and textually absenting the possibilities
of women’s leadership and resistance in insurrections, as “only
insurrections are to be feared” from men.83
The Brooks diagram, “in serving the cause of the injured African,”84 offers
an overview of the stowage plan of the slave merchant’s ship and forces
me to reflect on my own surveillance practices in reading the archive of
transatlantic slavery. The slave ship schematic is clinical in its architectural
logic and provides an almost aerial viewpoint, overlooking the tiny black
figures set to represent the enslaved drawn “like so many cartoon figures,”
as Spillers describes.85 What does it mean that I now look to this plan, but
not from the elevated and seemingly detached manner as it was first intended
to be looked upon? When the plan was first fashioned, this vantage
point was meant to be that of the predominantly white and male abolitionists
and lawmakers. I am reminded here of what Donna Haraway calls
the “conquering gaze from nowhere,” a gaze that is always unmarked, and
therefore already markedly white and male, and one that claims a power
to “represent while escaping representation.”86 I am also reminded here of
Frantz Fanon’s moment of awareness of a “racial epidermal schema” on
that train in France and “battered by tom- toms” and “slave- ships” and “dissected
under white eyes, the only real eyes,” when he says, “I took myself far
off from my own presence, far indeed and made myself an object.”87 What
this visual representation of the slave ship points to is the primacy given
in these abolitionist texts to white gazes and vantage points to the trauma
of slavery, where the tiny black figures are made to seem androgynous,
interchangeable, and replicable. This is the “god- trick of seeing everything
from nowhere,” and, as Haraway warns, “this eye fucks the world.”88 So it
gets a little tricky when I do this looking, seemingly an aerial reconnaissance
mission of the archive of surveillance and of slavery. In the versions
of the Brooks diagram that were produced in the United States, the slave ship plan as abolitionist text was made clear. A version published in the
periodical American Museum in May 1789 noted that it was “published by
order of the Pennsylvania Society for promoting the abolition of slavery.”
89 Capitalization of all letters in “abolition” served an express purpose
here, from the call for an end to the transatlantic slave trade to one for the
abolition of slavery itself. Further, in this version the making of premature
death through the stowage arrangements was described in this manner:
“and reduced nearly to the state of being buried alive, with just air enough
to preserve a degree of life sufficient to make them sensible of all the horror
of their situation.”90 These conditions of premature death left many
who traveled the Middle Passage as captives just on the cusp of survival.
“Buried alive, with just air enough.” According to Rediker, the mortality
rate onboard the Brooks was 11.7 percent, which was “high for its own day
(average for British ships between 1775 and 1800 was 7.95 percent).”91 With
a closer look at the Description of a Slave Ship, one can see that each of the
tiny black figures are not replicas of each other; rather, some have variously
crossed arms, different gestures, or seem to turn to face one another, while
some stare and look back at the gaze from nowhere, and in so being the
Description of a Slave Ship can also be understood as depicting black looks
and the trauma of Middle Passage as multiply experienced and survived,
and as hinting at the possible imaginings of what Omise’eke Natasha Tinsley
terms “erotic resistance,” that being the same- sex relationships forged
because of and in spite of this shipping arrangement, where the formation
of such relationships—like the intimate bond of shipmates—itself was an
act of resistance to “imperial desires for Africans’ living death.”92 Such resistance
was a refusal of the Babylon system, or, as Bob Marley sings in
“Babylon System”: “we refuse to be what you want us to be / we are what
we are.”
Racializing Surveillance
The historical formation of surveillance is not outside of the historical
formation of slavery. Using narratives of ex-slaves, runaway slave advertisements,
the census, and a set of plantation rules as primary source data,
what follows is a historicizing of some of the concepts and concerns that
now shape the field of surveillance studies, approached by examining slave
surveillance practices. The continuities that this archive reveals offer social theorists, I argue, new ways of understanding surveillance in contemporary
life.
Plantations, Passes, and Runaways
In the ten “General” and nineteen “Particular” rules for overseers recorded
in the mid- nineteenth century by Charles William Tait for the governing
of enslaved laborers on Sylvania, his 6,000-acre plantation in Columbus,
Texas, Tait listed the prescribed methods for crop cultivation and clearing
land, specified food rations, noted the daily schedule around meals and
rest (“they must be ready to go to work by sunrise”), and detailed his punishment
regime (“always attempt to govern by reason in the first instance
and resort to force only when reason fails”), as well as postnatal procedures
and back- to-work legislation for new mothers (“never require field- work
of a woman, until the expiration of four weeks after confinement”).93 With
the eighth general rule, Tait noted that “a regular and systematic plan of
operation is greatly promotive of easy government. Have all matters therefore,
as far as possible reduced to a system.”94 Tait’s directives on the managerial
control of slaves demonstrate how disciplinary power operated by
way of set rules, instructions, routines, inspection, hierarchical observation,
the timetable, and the examination. The timetable, then, was a means
of regimenting enslaved labor through repetition where there was an attempt
to account for every moment of enslaved life: “always require the negroes
to eat their breakfast before they go to work” and “every negro- cabin
to be inspected every sunday morning to see that it is kept clean. Every
negro to appear in the field on Monday morning in clean clothes.” Tait’s
fifteenth particular rule prescribed that “no profane or obscene language
to be allowed among the negroes.” The seventh general rule on punishment
was an explicit directive regarding the overseer’s performance that
accompanied the punishment, as Tait wrote, “Never act in such a way as to
leave the impression on the mind of the negro that you take pleasure in his
punishment, your manner should indicate that his punishment is painful.”
So the prescribed punishment must be performed as a pain experienced
by the overseer, who is not to express the possibility of pleasure taken in
performing acts of violence. That a rule needed to be put in place in order
to prevent such displays of violent delight should leave us to question the
rates at which such pleasure was really expressed when, as Saidiya Hartman
tells us, plantation practices sought to “make discipline a pleasure, and
vice versa.”95 Importantly, this rule shows that for Tait, this pained perfor-mance by the overseer was a suffering that was meant to be remembered
in the mind of the punished. Overseers were instructed by Tait’s ninth
general rule that “Negroes lack the motive of self- interest to make them
careful and diligent,” so in order to incentivize enslaved workers, “do not
therefore notice too many small omissions of duty.” What Tait’s rules for
overseers also make known is that plantation surveillance was an exercise
of both sovereign power and racialized disciplinary power, working simultaneously,
discretionarily, and in a prescribed fashion, as both were put to
use in plantation societies to render slave life expendable.
In Tait’s rules for what he called the “easy government” of his East Texas
plantation, the specific rules on bureaucratic management and surveillance
of slave mobilities, notably escape, were also made plain with particular
rule “17th the negroes are never to be allowed to leave the plantation unless
by special permission, and a written pass” and particular rule “18th no
strange negro to be allowed to visit the plantation, unless by permission of
the overseer, & a written pass from his master.” The slave pass system relied
on the notion that the slave could be known through a written identification
document. Christian Parenti’s writings on the kinds of surveillance
practices employed during chattel slavery in the southern United States
name the “information technologies” of the written slave pass, wanted
posters and advertisements for runaway slaves and servants, and organized
slave patrols as key features of this system.96 Parenti situates plantation surveillance
as the earliest form of surveillance practiced in the Americas. This
was a system of surveillance that was regulated through violence and the
written word.
The following accounts from Born in Slavery: Slave Narratives from the
Federal Writers’ Project, 1936– 1938 detailing the slave pass system further this
point:
By 1845 there were many laws on the Statute books of Georgia concerning
the duties of patrols. . . . Every member of the patrol was required
to carry a pistol while on duty. They were required to arrest
all slaves found outside their master’s domain without a pass, or who
was not in company with some white person. He was empowered to
whip such slave with twenty lashes.97
The pattie- rollers was something else. I heard folks say they would
beat the daylights almost out of you if they caught you without no
pass.
In the plantation system, the restriction of the mobility and literacy of the
enslaved served as an exercise of power. The racializing surveillance of the
slave pass system was a violent regulation of black mobilities. On and off
the plantation, black mobility needed to be tightly regulated in order for
slave owners to maintain control, so, as ex-slave Anderson Furr put it, one
had to “git a pass for dis and a pass for dat.”99 This was a system that also
relied on the publication and circulation of newspaper advertisements for
runaway slaves and truant servants that announced not only those who
escaped or went missing from plantations, but also those people who left
enslavement in private homes and establishments, like shops, inns, and taverns
in cities and urban spaces.
Runaway slave advertisements reveal a lot about black flight to freedom,
as these notices of escape would not only name those who left enslavement
and made their own way, but also provide a physical description and list
the monetary rewards, if any, that awaited those who aided in their capture
and return. These ads would list their talents, occupations and skills, vices,
languages spoken and whether or not they could read or write, strategies
they might have used to escape, and what they were wearing and took with
them when they made their way. Also listed would be clothing, musical
instruments, and other items that could be sold, traded, bartered, or used to
support the appearance of being free. An advertisement for a runaway slave
might read like so: “RUN away, a Negro Man named Tom, born in Jamaica,
but last from Havannah,” “blubber Lips, yellow Complexion, his Hair is
neither right Negro nor Indian, but between both,” “His eyes very full, as if
they were starting out of his head,” “had on when he went away a felt Hat,
a Cotton Cap, a Homespun Coat with brass Buttons, a West- coat without
sleeves, an Oznabrigs shirt, Leather Breeches with Brass Buttons, a pair of
worsted Stockings and a pair of yarn ones, two pair of peak’d toe’d Shoes,”
“his great Toes have been froze, and have only little pieces of nails on them,”
“plays well on the Fiddle, and can read and write; perhaps he may have a
false pass,” “is plausible and smooth in speaking, and may pass himself for
a Sailor, having been used to a boat,” whoever secures said Negro shall have
a reward of five pounds.100
An unusually long 1762 advertisement for “a Mulatto Servant man
named Charles Roberts” states not only his age and height, but the condition
of the clothes he carried, “several other Waistcoats, Breeches, and Pair
of Stocking; a blue Great Coat, and a Fiddle.” John Holt placed this ad, and
in it he states that Roberts spoke “smoothly and plausibly, and generally with a cringe and a smile,” and was good at arithmetic and accounting, leading
Holt to charge that Roberts had probably forged documents to pass as
a free man although he had “no legal claim to freedom.” Holt laments that
he placed confidence in Roberts, “which he has villainously abused; having
embezzled Money sent him to pay for Goods, borrowed money and taken
up goods” in Holt’s name, unbeknownst to him. The reward for Roberts’s
capture in New York City was five pounds, and if found elsewhere the award
would be greater. Anyone who captured him, the ad instructed, was to leave
any money found on Roberts’s person with the magistrate and was warned
to be careful and “very watchful against an Escape, or being deceived by
him, for he is one of the most artful of Villains.”101 Through their detailing
of physical descriptions, the surveillance technology of the runaway slave
advertisement was put to use to make the already hypervisible racial subject
legible, borrowing again from John Fiske here, as “out of place.”102
Runaway slave advertisements were not only about ascribing physical
details to the runaway, but also offered the slave owner’s assessment of the
fugitive’s character. One example of the role of runaway slave advertisements,
and similarly wanted posters, in upholding racial categorization is
a March 15, 1783, advertisement in the Royal Gazette offering a “Two Dollars
reward” for “a Mulatto, or Quadroon Girl, about 14 years of age, named
Seth, but calls herself Sall.” This runaway advertisement states that Seth
“sometimes says she is white and often paints her face to cover that deception.”
Seth’s duplicity is not limited to her use of the alias “Sall,” as this notice
informs its readers, but also to her racial ambiguity, in her apparent
choosing to self- identify or pass as white, rather than as “a Mulatto” (one
black parent and one white parent) or a “Quadroon Girl” (one black grandparent),
which was the racial nomenclature of the one- drop rule arising
out of slavery and continuing beyond that institution. This advertisement
also remarks that Sall has been “seen dancing” and “is well known in town,
and particularly at the Fly- Market, for many wicked tricks.” The Fly- Market
in Lower Manhattan served as the city’s market for provisions and other
goods up until the early nineteenth century. Sall’s ability to evade surveillance
through makeup, wicked tricks, and hiding in plain sight exposes the
one- drop rule as a social construction that, for some, could be subverted by
performing whiteness. Seth’s, or sometimes Sall’s, hiding in plain sight—
by identifying as white and using an alias—was a freedom practice to evade
surveillance, and in so being a form of dark sousveillance. An 1836 runaway advertisement describes Edmund Kenney, who escaped enslavement by
passing as white, thus: “he has straight hair, and complexion so nearly
white, that it is believed a stranger would suppose there was no African
blood in him.”103 An 1845 advertisement boasting a five hundred dollar reward
for “a negro woman named Fanny” described her as a Bible- carrying,
literate, “intelligent woman” who was “as white as most white women, with
straight light hair, and blue eyes, and can pass herself for a white woman.”104
The Census
In 1848 when Ellen and William Craft made their way out of Georgia and escaped
chattel slavery by trains and by ships, they were able to do so through
the ways in which Ellen’s body was able to trouble the one- drop rule. Born
to a black mixed- raced mother and fathered by the white man who owned
her mother, Ellen was, at the time, labeled a quadroon but able to pass as
white, as sometimes deaf and an “invalid gentleman” named “Mr. William
Johnson.” She passed as her husband’s owner in order to secure his freedom
as well as her own.105 She used a poultice and put it in a white handkerchief
“worn under the chin, up the cheeks, and to tie over the head,” hoping that
this disguise would hide “the expression of the countenance, as well as the
beardless chin.”106 Because she could not read or write at the time of her
escape, she feigned inflammatory rheumatism and placed her right arm in
a sling in order to evade detection if, for example, she were asked to sign
her name in a hotel’s guest register. With Craft, her passing in terms of race,
passing in terms of gender, passing in terms of class, and passing in terms of
disability all played a role in her and William’s passing into freedom.107 The
Crafts eventually left Boston to later arrive in England, where they lived for
nineteen years before returning to the United States, where they opened
a school for children and a cooperative farm in Georgia. In the 1850 census,
Ellen was listed as residing in Boston and her race is recorded as Black
(or rather ″ for “ditto,” as it was recorded in the column under William’s).
The 1850 census marked the first time that the federal census included slave
schedules for some states in order to enumerate each enslaved person held
in a household or dwelling. By the 1890 census, Ellen Craft was recorded as
“M” for Mulatto and her occupation as “keeping house” in Bryan County,
Georgia.
In the United States, racial nomenclature as a form of population management
was made official with the taking of the first federal census in 1790, which asked questions regarding the number of free white males, free white
females, other free people, and slaves in a household. Census enumeration
is a means through which a state manages its residents by way of formalized
categories that fix individuals within a certain time and a particular space,
making the census a technology that renders a population legible in racializing
as well as gendering ways. The census is a form of “state stocktaking,”
as David Theo Goldberg puts it, which discloses “population size, shape,
distribution, quality and flow of labor supply, taxation and conscription
pools, political representation, voter predictability, and the necessities of
population reproduction.”108 While such “state stocktaking” sees the census
informant respond to a series of questions, including date of birth, how
many people live in a single dwelling, and whether or not the dwelling is
rented or owned, it takes the form of racializing surveillance through its
very reinscription of racial categories. As an example, in terms of racial categories
and the U.S. census form, there has remained a constant, unspecified
whiteness as a racial category. Rather than employing an alphabetical
order, “White” is always listed first among the boxes from which to choose
in order to answer the question of the census informant’s race. The proliferation
of racial categories from which to choose, or have one’s answer
assigned, was first reserved for the management of blackness, with other
groupings later added to reflect changing immigration patterns. In the 1890
census, Mulatto, Quadroon, and Octoroon appeared as subcategories of
“Black,” but by the 1900 census these subcategories were “collapsed into
the singularity of an unqualified blackness,” reflecting the one- drop rule.109
“Mu” for Mulatto was reintroduced in 1910 and in the 1930 census it was
replaced with “Neg” for Negro, a racial category that would fall in and out
of favor, depending on each subsequent decennial enumeration. For the
2010 census, “Black, African- Am or Negro” were subsumed under one box
and in 2013 the Census Bureau announced that “Negro” would be dropped
from its surveys. As Goldberg writes, when the category “Mexican” was
first introduced, it was understood as meaning not white unless the census
informant “explicitly and accurately claimed white descent.”110 In this way,
it was left to the census taker to judge whether the census informant’s claim
to the category of whiteness was valid, rather than accepting at face value
the informant’s self- identification as white. The 2010 questionnaire asks
if the census informant is “of Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin,” and, if
“yes,” the informant can choose “Mexican, Mexican Am., Chicano,” Puerto
Rican, or Cuban or fill in the blank to specify “another Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin.” From its inception, the census has been a technology
of disciplinary power that classifies, examines, and quantifies populations.
What It’s Like, What It Is:
Controlling Images and Black Looks
In Fighting Words: Black Women and the Search for Justice, while referring
not specifically to prison surveillance or plantation slavery but to the postslavery,
segregated southern United States, Patricia Hill Collins writes
that while racial segregation was aimed at black people as a group or class
and sought to erase individuality by making black people seemingly interchangeable,
surveillance “highlights individuality by making the individual
hypervisible and on display.”111 As part of the practice of “racial etiquette”
in the segregated South, surveillance, Collins tells us, was a way of
ensur ing that “Blacks would stay in their designated, subordinate places in
white- controlled public and private spheres.”112 Collins situates the bodies
and lives of black women who labored as domestic workers and the
white- controlled private homes in which they were employed as the “testing
ground for surveillance as a form of control” that was enacted by way of
“techniques of surveillance,” including close scrutiny, sexual harassment,
assault, violence, or the threat thereof. For the white women who employed
them, Collins argues, this arrangement was predicated on the illusion that
“the Black women workers whom they invited into their private homes felt
like ‘one of the family,’ even though they actually had second- class citizenship
in the family.”113 Yet within these labor conditions of hypervisibility,
black domestic workers needed to assume a certain invisibility where, as
bell hooks observes, “reduced to the machinery of bodily physical labor,
black people learned to appear before whites as though they were zombies,
cultivating the habit of casting the gaze downward so as not to appear
uppity.”114 Seemingly “invisible to most white people, except as a pair of
hands offering a drink on a silver tray,” this signifying act was performed
by many domestic laborers so that they would be assumed to be readily
manageable and nonthreating.115 Coupled with this system of scrutinizing
black women’s domestic labor in private white homes was the controlling
image of “the mammy,” one of “several interrelated, socially constructed
controlling images of Black women, each reflecting the dominant group’s
interest in maintaining Black women’s subordination.”116 The mammy as a representational practice relies on the circulation of stereotyped images
and ideologies of black womanhood that seek to position black women
as “the faithful, obedient domestic servant.”117 The mammy is depicted as
caring for the family in which she is employed, often to the sacrifice of her
own. This social control mechanism was “created to justify the economic
exploitation of house slaves and sustained to explain Black women’s longstanding
restriction to domestic service,” representing, as Collins puts it,
“the normative yardstick used to evaluate all Black women’s behavior.”118 In
so being, the mammy served as a symbol of “the dominant group’s perceptions
of the ideal Black female relationship to elite White male power.”119
She is content, deferential, forgiving, nurturing, and loyal to the family
that she cares for, operating with some authority, however marginal, while
still knowing “her ‘place’ as obedient servant.”120 Such exaggerated representational
strategies work to rationalize the economic exploitation and
sexual subjugation of black domestic workers and of those who labor in
low- paying conditions in the service sector. This mammy image circulates
throughout dominant culture, from films such as Gone with the Wind (1939)
to The Help (2011), to what Patricia A. Turner calls “contemptible collectibles,”
those distorted depictions of blackness that often take the shape of
figurines, postcards, kitchen utensils, and lawn ornaments. Simply put,
“Mammy is the public face that Whites expect Black women to assume for
them.”121 Of course, many black women who labored in white households
forged loving and nurturing relations with their own families, despite the
harsh working conditions of white supremacy.122
In her discussion of the black gaze and looking relations during slavery
and during the racial apartheid of Jim Crow in the southern United States,
hooks notes that although black people “could be brutally punished for
looking, for appearing to observe the whites they were serving, as only a
subject can observe or see,” the violent ways in which blacks were denied
the right to look back “had produced in us an overwhelming longing to
look, a rebellious desire, an oppositional gaze.”123 “Black looks” were politicized
and transformative when, as hooks states, “by courageously looking,
we defiantly declared: ‘Not only will I stare. I want my look to change
reality.’ ”124 This stare is the type of “eyeballing disposition” that disrupts
racializing surveillance where, as Maurice O. Wallace discusses, such looks
challenge the “fetishizing machinations of the racial gaze.”125
Disruptive staring is the focus of Pan’s Opticon, a fifteen- panel photograph
by South African artist Robin Rhode (figure 1.3). In it, Rhode’s sub-ject, a black man and Rhode’s doppelg.nger, is smartly dressed in a fashion
similar to that of the subjects that South African photographer Ernest Cole
documented in his 1967 book House of Bondage as they toiled, were relocated
or banished, defied, and survived under passbook laws and the racist
repression of apartheid South Africa. It can also be said that Rhode’s subject
gestures to the tsotsi aesthetic popularized by Soweto youth and those in
other townships of Johannesburg in the 1940s, a style and fashioning of masculinity
that reflected working- class township life: a dark pinstriped jacket,
white- collared shirt, and a straw boater hat.126 His back is to the camera as
he faces a concrete wall. His stare is accessorized with inside calipers—like
compasses, but with the needles at each end curving outward—that appear
to jut out from each of his eyes. The inside caliper first appeared around the
sixteenth century as a measuring device often used to determine the dimensions
of an aperture, that being the space through which light rays pass and
come into focus on an image surface. In photography, the aperture’s diameter
regulates the amount of light that reaches the image surface. The smaller the
aperture size, the darker the surface will appear. For the astronomical telescope,
the aperture is the optical element that gathers light and brings the
atmosphere into focus. No telescope, so far, can make dark matter visible.
Rhode’s subject in the Pan’s Opticon series is suited up with a prosthetic
look. His ocular interrogation confronts the Panopticon and the architecture
of surveillance—corners, shadows, reflections, and light—covering
the wall with dark matter. On the subject of walls and architecture, Rhode
writes that “when one speaks of walls, one speaks of security, privacy, and
demarcation.”127 Rhode’s Pan’s Opticon is a play on Bentham’s Panopticon.
Rhode’s naming of his series of photographs with the possessive noun Pan’s
is a claiming of Bentham’s eighteenth- century plan for “obtaining power of
mind over mind.”128 Rhode’s black subject is not backed into a corner, but
facing it, confronting and returning unverified gazes. That Rhode is a South
African artist based in Germany points to the ways that disruptive staring
can be transnational, as transnational as the structures that it disrupts. The
stenciled circumferences of incomplete circles of black spray paint seemingly
emanate from his eyes onto the wall’s surface. With each frame of the
storyboard, the circles refracted by the subject’s eyes multiply, overlapping
each other like disorganized Venn diagrams until the corner is completely
covered in dark matter. In one frame, no neat stenciled circles appear, just
two solid but smaller black circles of spray paint dripping down from the
calipers onto the concrete wall, suggesting, perhaps, a peephole for a cu-rious spectator’s stolen vision, or the excesses of black looks that bleed
outside stenciled borders, color outside the lines, and are out of place.
The disruptive stare of the subject in Adrian Piper’s video installation
What It’s Like, What It Is #3 (figure 1.4) is one such act of courageous looking.
At the center of this installation is a four- sided column, like the Panopticon’s
inspection tower, but with each side of the column fitted with a
television screen. Each screen plays prerecorded video of the front, back,
and profile views of a black man (actor John L. Moore) who stares at those
watching Piper’s installation as he states his refusals of the stereotypes
placed upon blackness: “I’m not pushy. I’m not sneaky. I’m not lazy. I’m not
noisy.” After listing four such refusals, he turns to face another direction
and then lists four more: “I’m not vulgar. I’m not rowdy. I’m not horny. I’m
not scary.” He looks directly at the viewers of this installation, who can be
either standing or seated on the bleacher- like seating that surrounds the
center column. The installation is all- white and through its use of mirrors,
the video is reflected throughout. In this setting like a lecture hall, viewers of this installation are then instructed by the lists of refusals of the critique
coming from the bodiless head in the column. In this way, What It’s Like,
What It Is #3 can be read as confronting the surveillance imposed upon
black life. The soundtrack to the nearly five- minute video of the installation
is the Commodores’ song “Zoom” (1977), playing in the background while
the subject tells what it’s like to live with antiblack racism, racial stereotyping,
and the scrutiny of white supremacy coming from all sides: “I’m not
shiftless. I’m not crazy. I’m not servile. I’m not stupid.” His list of what black
people are not is looped in repetition, leaving a space for alternative imaginings
of what blackness really is and could be, while the voice of Commodores
lead singer Lionel Richie croons in the background track, singing,
“Zoom. I’d like to fly far away from here . . . where everybody can be what
they want to be” and “I wish the word they call freedom someday would
come.” The song’s lyrics express hope for escape, freedom, and a new way
of being. In this way, Piper’s piece offers us a look at oppositional gazing
and talking back to the normalizing judgment and hierarchical observa-tion of disciplinary, controlling images. Talking back is, as hooks puts it,
“the expression of our movement from object to subject” and a “gesture of
defiance that heals, that makes new life and new growth possible.”129 Talking
back, then, is one way of challenging surveillance and its imposition of
norms.