Transcript
Mary Church Terrell's Speech before the NAWSA, February 18, 1898
Fifty years ago a meeting such as this, planned, conducted and addressed by women would have
been an impossibility. Less than forty years ago, few sane men would have predicted that either a
slave or one of his descendants would in this century at least, address such an audience in the
Nation's Capital at the invitation of women representing the highest, broadest, best type of
womanhood, that can be found anywhere in the world. Thus to me this semi-centennial of the
National American Woman Suffrage Association is a double jubilee, rejoicing as I do, not only
in the prospective enfranchisement of my sex but in the emancipation of my race. When
Ernestine Rose, Lucretia Mott, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucy Stone and Susan B. Anthony began
that agitation by which colleges were opened to women and the numerous reforms inaugurated
for the amelioration of their condition along all lines, their sisters who groaned in bondage had
little reason to hope that these blessings would ever brighten their crushed and blighted lives, for
during those days of oppression and despair, colored women were not only refused admittance to
institutions of learning, but the law of the States in which the majority lived made it a crime to
teach them to read. Not only could they possess no property, but even their bodies were not their
own. Nothing, in short, that could degrade or brutalize the womanhood of the race was lacking in
that system from which colored women then had little hope of escape. So gloomy were their
prospects, so fatal the laws, so pernicious the customs, only fifty years ago. But, from the day
their fetters were broken and their minds released from the darkness of ignorance to which for
more than two hundred years they had been doomed, from the day they could stand erect in the
dignity of womanhood, no longer bond but free, till tonight, colored women have forged steadily
ahead in the acquisition of knowledge and in the cultivation of those virtues which make for
good. To use a thought of the illustrious Frederick Douglass, if judged by the depths from which
they have come, rather than by the heights to which those blessed with centuries of opportunities
have attained, colored women need not hang their heads in shame. Consider if you will, the
almost insurmountable obstacles which have confronted colored women in their efforts to
educate and cultivate themselves since their emancipation, and I dare assert, not boastfully, but
with pardonable pride, I hope, that the progress they have made and the work they have
accomplished, will bear a favorable comparison at least with that of their more fortunate sisters,
from the opportunity of acquiring knowledge and the means of self-culture have never been
entirely withheld. For, not only are colored women with ambition and aspiration handicapped on
account of their sex, but they are everywhere baffled and mocked on account of their race.
Desperately and continuously they are forced to fight that opposition, born of a cruel,
unreasonable prejudice which neither their merit nor their necessity seems able to subdue. Not
only because they are women, but because they are colored women, are discouragement and
disappointment meeting them at every turn. Avocations opened and opportunities offered to their
more favored sisters have been and are tonight closed and barred against them. While those of
the dominant race have a variety of trades and pursuits from which they may choose, the woman
through whose veins one drop of African blood is known to flow is limited to a pitiful few. So
overcrowded are the avocations in which colored women may engage and so poor is the pay in
consequence, that only the barest livelihood can be eked out by the rank and file. And yet, in
spite of the opposition encountered, the obstacles opposed to their acquisition of knowledge and
their accumulation of property, the progress made by colored women along these lines has never
Page 1 of 6
 
Transcript
been surpassed by that of any people in the history of the world. Though the slaves were
liberated less than forty years ago, penniless, and ignorant, with neither shelter nor food, so great
was their thirst for knowledge and so herculean were their efforts to secure it, that there are today
hundreds of negroes, many of them women, who are graduates, some of them having taken
degrees from the best institutions of the land. From Oberlin, that friend of the oppressed,
Oberlin, my dear alma mater, whose name will always be loved and whose praise will ever be
sung as the first college in the country which was just, broad and benevolent enough to open its
doors to negroes and to women on an equal footing with men; from Wellesley and Vassar, from
Cornell and Ann Arbor, from the best high schools throughout the North, East and West, Colored
girls have been graduated with honors, and have thus forever settled the question of their
capacity and worth. But a few years ago in an examination in which a large number of young
women and men competed for a scholarship, entitling the successful competitor to an entire
course through the Chicago University, the only colored girl among them stood first and
captured this great prize. And so, wherever colored girls have studied, their instructors bear
testimony to their intelligence, diligence and success.
With this increase of wisdom there has sprung up in the hearts of colored women an ardent
desire to do good in the world. No sooner had the favored few availed themselves of such
advantages as they could secure than they hastened to dispense these blessings to the less
fortunate of their race. With tireless energy and eager zeal, colored women have, since their
emancipation, been continuously prosecuting the work of educating and elevating their race, as
though upon themselves alone devolved the accomplishment of this great task. Of the teachers
engaged in instructing colored youth, it is perhaps no exaggeration to say that fully ninety per
cent are women. In the back-woods, remote from the civilization and comforts of the city and
town, on the plantations reeking with ignorance and vice, our colored women may be found
battling with evils which such conditions always entail. Many a heroine, of whom the world will
never hear, has thus sacrificed her life to her to her race, amid surroundings and in the face of
privations which only martyrs can tolerate and bear. Shirking responsibility has never been a
fault with which colored women might be truthfully charged. Indefatigably and conscientiously,
in public work of all kinds they engage, that they may benefit and elevate their race. The result of
this labor has been prodigious indeed. By banding themselves together in the interest of
education and morality, by adopting the most practical and useful means to this end, colored
women have in thirty short years become a great power for good. Through the National
Association of Colored Women, which was formed by the union of two large organizations in
July, 1896, and which is now the only national body among colored women, much good has
been done in the past, and more will be accomplished in the future, we hope. Believing that it is
only through the home that a people can become really good and truly great, the National
Association of Colored Women has entered that sacred domain. Homes, more homes, better
homes, purer homes is the text upon which our have been and will be preached. Through
mothers' meetings, which are a special feature of the work planned by the Association, much
useful information in everything pertaining to the home will be disseminated. We would have
heart-to-heart talks with our women, that we may strike at the root of evils, many of which lie,
alas, at the fireside. If the women of the dominant race with all the centuries of education, culture
and refinement back of them, with all their wealth of opportunity ever present with them--if these
women feel the need of a Mothers' Congress that they may be enlightened as to the best methods
of rearing children and conducting their homes, how much more do our women, from whom
Page 2 of 6
 
Transcript
shackles have but yesterday fallen, need information on the same vital subjects? And so
throughout the country we are working vigorously and conscientiously to establish Mothers'
Congresses in every community in which our women may be found.
Under the direction of the Tuskegee, Alabama branch of the National Association, the work of
bringing the light of knowledge and the gospel of cleanliness to their benighted sisters on the
plantations has been conducted with signal success. Their efforts have thus far been confined to
four estates, comprising thousand of acres of land, on which live hundreds of colored people, yet
in the darkness of ignorance and the grip of sin, miles away from churches and schools. Under
the evil influences of plantation owners, and through no fault of their own, the condition of the
colored people is, in some sections to-day no better than it was at the close of the war. Feeling
the great responsibility resting upon them, therefore, colored women, both in organizations under
the National Association, and as individuals are working with might and main to afford their
unfortunate sisters opportunities of civilization and education, which without them, they would
be unable to secure.
By the Tuskegee club and many others all over the country, object lessons are given in the best
way to sweep, dust, cook, wash and iron, together with other information concerning household
affairs. Talks on social purity and the proper method of rearing children are made for the benefit
of those mothers, who in many instances fall short of their duty, not because they are vicious and
depraved, but because they are ignorant and poor. Against the one-room cabin so common in the
rural settlements in the South, we have inaugurated a vigorous crusade. When families of eight
eight or ten, consisting of men, women and children, are all huddled together in a single
apartment, a condition of things found not only in the South, but among our poor all over the
land, there is little hope of inculcating morality or modesty. And yet, in spite of these
environments which are so destructive of virtue, and though the safeguards usually thrown
around maidenly youth and innocence are in some sections withheld from colored girls, statistics
compiled by men, not inclined to falsify in favor of my race, show that immorality among
colored women is not so great as among women in countries like Austria, Italy, Germany,
Sweden and France.
In New York City a mission has been established and is entirely supported by colored women
under supervision of the New York City Board. It has in operation a kindergarten, classes in
cooking and sewing, mothers' meetings, mens' meetings, a reading circle and a manual training
school for boys. Much the same kind of work is done by the Colored Woman's League and the
Ladies Auxiliary of this city, the Kansas City League of Missouri, the Woman's Era Club of
Boston, the Woman's Loyal Union of New York, and other organizations representing almost
every State in the Union. The Phyllis Wheatley Club of New Orleans, another daughter of the
National Association, has in two short years succeeded in establishing a Sanatorium and a
Training School for nurses. The conditions which caused the colored women of New Orleans to
choose this special field in which to operate are such as exist in many other sections of our land.
From the city hospitals colored doctors are excluded altogether, not even being allowed to
practice in the colored wards and colored patients--no matter how wealthy they are--are not
received at all, unless they are willing to go into the charity wards. Thus the establishment of a
Sanatorium answers a variety of purposes. It affords colored medical students an opportunity of
Page 3 of 6
 
Transcript
gaining a practical knowledge of their profession, and it furnishes a well-equipped establishment
for colored patients who do not care to go into the charity wards of the public hospitals.
The daily clinics have been a great blessing to the colored poor. In the operating department,
supplied with all the modern appliances, two hundred operations have been performed, all of
which have resulted successfully under the colored surgeon-in-chief. Of the eight nurses who
have registered, one has already passed an examination before the State Medical Board of
Louisiana, and is now practicing her profession. During the yellow fever epidemic in New
Orleans last summer, there was a constant demand for Phyllis Wheatley nurses. By indefatigable
energy and heroic sacrifice of both money and time, these noble women raised nearly one
thousand dollars, with which to defray the expenses of the Sanatorium for the first eight months
of its existence. They have recently succeeded in securing from the city of New Orleans an
annual appropriation of two hundred and forty dollars, which they hope will soon be increased.
Dotted all over the country are charitable organizations for the aged, orphaned and poor, which
have been established by colored women; just how many, it is difficult to state. Since there is
such an imperative need of statistics, bearing on the progress, possessions, and prowess of
colored women, the National Association has undertaken to secure this data of such value and
importance to the race. Among the charitable institutions, either founded, conducted or supported
by colored women, may be mentioned the Hale Infirmary of Montgomery, Alabama; the Carrie
Steel Orphanage of Atlanta; the Reed Orphan Home of Covington; the Haines Industrial School
of Augusta in the State of Georgia; a Home for the Aged of both races at New Bedford and St.
Monica's Home of Boston in Massachusetts; Old Folks' Home of Memphis, Tenn; colored
Orphan's Home, Lexington, Ky., together with others of which time forbids me to speak.
Mt. Meigs Institute is an excellent example of a work originated and carried into successful
execution by a colored woman. The school was established for the benefit of colored people on
the plantations in the black belt of Alabama, because of the 700,000 negroes living in that
State,probably 90 per cent are outside of the cities; and Waugh was selected because in the
township of Mt. Meigs, the population is practically all colored. Instruction given in this school
is of the kind best suited to the needs of those people for whom it was established. Along with
their scholastic training, girls are taught everything pertaining to the management of a home,
while boys learn practical farming, carpentering, wheel-wrighting, blacksmithing, and have some
military training. Having started with almost nothing, only eight years ago, the trustees of the
school now own nine acres of land, and five buildings, in which two thousand pupils have
received instruction--all through the courage the industry and sacrifice of one good woman. The
Chicago clubs and several others engage in rescue work among fallen women and tempted girls.
Questions affecting or legal status as a race are also constantly agitated by our women. In
Louisiana and Tennessee, colored women have several times petitioned the legislatures of their
respective States to repeal the obnoxious "Jim Crow Car" laws, nor will any stone be left
unturned until this iniquitous and unjust enactment against respectable American citizens be
forever wiped from the statutes of the South. Against the barbarous Convict Lease System of
Georgia, of which negroes, especially the female prisoners, are the principal victims, colored
women are waging a ceaseless war. By two lecturers, each of whom, under the Woman's
Christian Temperance Union has been National Superintendent of work among colored people,
the cause of temperance has for many years been eloquently
Page 4 of 6
 
Transcript
espoused.
In business, colored women have had signal success. There is in Alabama a large milling and
cotton business belonging to and controlled entirely by a colored woman who has sometimes as
many as seventy-five men in her employ. In Halifax, Nova Scotia, the principal ice plant of the
city is owned and managed by one of our women. In the professions we have dentists and
doctors, whose practice is lucrative and large. Ever since the publication, in 1773, of a book
entitled "Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral," by Phyllis Wheatley, negro servant
of Mr John Wheatley of Boston, colored women have from time to time given abundant evidence
of literary ability. In sculpture we are represented by a woman upon whose chisel Italy has set
her seal of approval; in painting, by Bougerean's pupil, whose work was exhibited in the last
Paris Salon, and in Music by young women holding diplomas from the first conservatories in the
land.
And, finally, as an organization of women nothing lies nearer the heart of the National
Association than the children, many of whose lives, so sad and dark, we might brighten and
bless. It is the kindergarten we need. Free kindergartens in every city and hamlet of this broad
land we must have, if the children are to receive from us what it is our duty to give. Already
during the past year kindergartens have been established and successfully maintained by several
organizations, from which most encouraging reports have come. May their worthy example be
emulated, till in no branch of the Association shall the children of the poor, at least, be deprived
of the blessings which flow from the kindergarten alone. The more unfavorable the environments
of children, the more necessary is it that steps be taken to counteract baleful influences on
innocent victims. How imperative is it then that as colored women, we inculcate correct
principles and set good examples for our own youth, whose little feet will have so many thorny
paths of prejudice temptation, and injustice to tread. The colored youth is vicious we are told,
and statistics showing the multitudes of our boys and girls who crowd the penitentiaries and fill
the jails appall and dishearten us. But side by side with these facts and figures of crime I would
have presented and pictured the miserable hovels from which these youth criminals come. Make
a tour of the settlements of colored people, who in many cities are relegated to the most noisome
sections permitted by the municipal government, and behold the mites of humanity who infest
them. Here are our little ones, the future representatives of the race, fairly drinking in the
pernicious example of their elders, coming in contact with nothing but ignorance and vice, till at
the age of six, evil habits are formed which no amount of civilizing or Christianizing can ever
completely break. Listen to the cry of our children. In imitation of the example set by the Great
Teacher of men, who could not offer himself as a sacrifice, until he had made an eternal plea for
the innocence and helplessness of childhood, colored women are everywhere reaching out after
the waifs and strays, who without their aid may be doomed to lives of evil and shame. As an
organization, the National Association of Colored Women feels that the establishment of
kindergartens is the special mission which we are called to fulfill. So keenly alive are we to the
necessity of rescuing our little ones, whose noble qualities are deadened and dwarfed by the very
atmosphere which they breathe, that the officers of the Association are now trying to secure
means by which to send out a kindergarten organizer, whose duty it shall be both to arouse the
conscience of our women, and to establish kindergartens, wherever the means therefore can be
secured.
Page 5 of 6
 
Transcript
And so, lifting as we climb, onward and upward we go, struggling and striving, and hoping that
the buds and blossoms of our desires will burst into glorious fruition ere long. With courage,
born of success achieved in the past, with a keen sense of the responsibility which we shall
continue to assume, we look forward to a future large with promise and hope. Seeking no favors
because of our color, nor patronage because of our needs, we knock at the bar of justice, asking
an equal chance.
This transcript of Mary Church Terrell's speech, "The Progress of Colored Women" is from the
bibliographic entry on the Library of Congress's American Memory Web site.
Citation: The progress of colored women / by Mary Church Terrell, Washington, D.C. : Smith
Brothers, Printers ..., [1898] Daniel A.P. Murray Pamphlets Collection, Rare Book and Special
Collections Division, Library of Congress.
Page 6 of 6
 